

===== PAGE 1 =====
This paper is included in the Proceedings of the 
2021 USENIX Annual Technical Conference.
July 14–16, 2021
978-1-939133-23-6
Open access to the Proceedings of the 
2021 USENIX Annual Technical Conference 
is sponsored by USENIX.ICARUS: Attacking low Earth orbit satellite networks
Giacomo Giuliari, Tommaso Ciussani, Adrian Perrig, and Ankit Singla, ETH Zurich
https://www.usenix.org/conference/atc21/presentation/giuliari

===== PAGE 2 =====
ICARUS : Attacking low Earth orbit satellite networks
Giacomo Giuliari, Tommaso Ciussani, Adrian Perrig, Ankit Singla
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich
Abstract
Internet service based on low Earth orbit satellites is gener-
ating immense excitement in the networking community due
to its potential for global low-latency connectivity. Despite
the promise of LEO satellite networks, the security of their
operation has so far been largely neglected. In this context,
we present ICARUS , a new class of denial of service attacks
on LEO networks. ICARUS turns these networks’ key bene-
ﬁts into vulnerabilities: an adversary can leverage the direct
global accessibility to launch an attack from numerous lo-
cations, while the quest for low latency constrains routing,
and provides predictability to the adversary. We explore how
the adversary can exploit other unique features, including the
path structure of such networks, and the public knowledge of
the locations and connectivity of the satellite-routers. We ﬁnd
that a small amount of attack bandwidth can hamper commu-
nications between large terrestrial areas. Finally, we lay out
open problems in this direction, and provide a framework to
enable further research on attacks and defenses in this context.
1 Introduction
SpaceX Starlink [60,61], Amazon Kuiper [35], and others are
deploying hundreds to thousands of satellites, each carrying
high-capacity networking equipment. These low Earth orbit
(LEO) satellite networks (LSNs) aim to provide global broad-
band Internet service. While global access would itself be a
huge leap in connectivity, these networks also promise low-
latency communications between otherwise well-connected
regions. For instance, recent work [9] shows that for long-
distance communication beyond a few thousand kilometers,
such networks could provide lower latency than not only to-
day’s ﬁber Internet, but also specialized free-space radio net-
working used in the high-frequency trading industry.
Driven by the exciting potential of global low-latency net-
working, researchers are exploring many interesting problems
related to LSNs, such as estimating their latency improve-
ments [9, 28], and network topology design [10] and new
routing strategies [25, 29, 33].
However, prior work has thus far largely ignored the aspect
of the secure operation of these networks in the face of adver-
saries. We hence explore the resilience of LSNs to a large-
scale volumetric distributed denial-of-service (DDoS) attack,
carried out by a botnet of compromised satellite-enabled hosts.
This threat has been extensively studied in terrestrial networks,
but as we detail later (§ 3.4), an LSN is an extremely different
environment: an adversary can leverage its global footprint
to ﬂexibly inject trafﬁc into the network; knowledge about
node (satellite) locations and network structure, far from be-ing closely guarded, is easily available public information;
and the low-latency objective both limits path diversity and
reduces uncertainty about routing for the adversary.
With these unique opportunities for the adversary, also
come new challenges: unlike a terrestrial transit network, the
LSN connects directly to the clients injecting trafﬁc into it,
and can more easily detect and stop malicious behavior; at
least initially, the client population will be much smaller than
the Internet, limiting the adversary’s resources; and the sparse
structure of the inter-satellite network creates a risk for attack
trafﬁc ﬂows to congest each other instead of the target(s).
Leveraging the unique opportunities and addressing the
new challenges, we present ICARUS , a DDoS attack on LSNs.
ICARUS draws on Coremelt [64] and Crossﬁre [31], and other
DDoS work, but is customized for LSNs — the adversary
carefully plans attack trafﬁc using an LSN’s structure, with
the objective of congesting a target link or set of target links.
The adversary hopes to do so at low cost, in terms of attack
trafﬁc volume, and with low detectability , in terms of change
in the ingress bandwidth at individual satellites.
To help develop intuition in this new setting, we ﬁrst an-
alyze ICARUS in the scenario where the LSN uses single
shortest-path routing. By simulating the attack on the LSN
with the largest deployment to date, Starlink, we ﬁnd that
the adversary can successfully target the majority of its links,
congesting both ground-to-satellite links and inter-satellite
links (ISLs). Somewhat surprisingly, multi-target attacks that
hamper connectivity between large regions are also feasible,
at somewhat higher cost, but without increasing detectability
compared to the single-target case.
In practice, LSNs may leverage multipath routing, poten-
tially with randomized load balancing. We thus introduce a
probabilistic version of ICARUS , that allows them to congest
the target(s) with high probability, despite the uncertainty of
routing. We analyze this attack against four intuitive routing
schemes. Unfortunately, our experiments show that ICARUS
is still able to attack targets at some additional cost compared
to the single shortest-path scenario. The routing scheme that
is most effective at increasing the attack cost—by 385% for
the median target, ifthe adversary desires to minimize risk of
detection—incurs a large latency increase on its paths, 1:32
in the median and up to 2:04in more extreme cases. Despite
this latency inﬂation, in the absolute, this increased attack
cost still translates to less than 80Gbps of attack trafﬁc, and
with a few tens of Mbps of bandwidth per bot, as promised
by LSNs, translates to a few thousand bots. This is also the
most pessimistic scenario for the attacker: there is no benign
network trafﬁc to lower the bar for congesting targets, the
USENIX Association 2021 USENIX Annual Technical Conference    317

===== PAGE 3 =====
LSN is willing to accept a large latency degradation, and the
attacker seeks to minimize detectability rather than cost. In
many settings, a few hundred bots will sufﬁce instead.
Lastly, we brieﬂy analyze additional attack opportunities
that may arise from the dynamic nature of LSNs — as satel-
lites move and paths change, there is natural ﬂux in both the
latencies of end-end paths, and in the trafﬁc carried by each
ISL. An adversary could potentially leverage latency changes
to double the bandwidth of attack ﬂows for a short period, in
a manner similar to temporal lensing [55]. However, early
results indicate little additional utility from this seemingly
promising method. Further, an adversary may also time their
attack ﬂows to coincide with natural surges in link utiliza-
tion from path changes. Our preliminary analysis indicates
promise for this latter strategy, but a packet-level analysis is
necessary to ascertain its impact.
Our main contributions are:
•We draw out the unique features of LSNs that introduce
a vulnerability to DDoS, motivating a new analysis of a
problem well-studied in terrestrial networks.
•We present the ICARUS attack, which exploits these unique
features to successfully congest target links in an LSN.
ICARUS addresses the new challenges the LSN setting
poses for the adversary in terms of cost and detectability.
•We use the simple single shortest-path routing setting to
develop intuition, and to show how connectivity between
large regions may be hampered by ICARUS .
•We extend ICARUS to a randomized multipath routing sce-
nario, and evaluate it against four intuitive routing schemes,
showing that the attack still succeeds with high probability.
To the best of our knowledge, ICARUS is the ﬁrst volumet-
ric DDoS attack on upcoming LSNs. Beyond our particular
attack methods and results, we hope that our analysis frame-
work will aid further work on the vulnerability of LSNs to
DDoS attacks, and on developing and evaluating mitigation
strategies, e.g., routing that optimizes the latency-resilience
tradeoff. Our framework is available on GitHub.
2 Background & related work
Our contributions lie at the intersection of the nascent research
on large upcoming LSNs, and well-studied (for terrestrial
networks) denial-of-service (DoS) attacks. We introduce the
relevant background for both.
2.1 LEO satellite networks
In the proposed and under-deployment LSNs, hundreds to
thousands of satellites will be arranged in equally-spaced
orbital planes , each containing the same number of satellites.
Satellites connect to terminal units (TUs) on the ground with
radio links. At the same time, satellites may connect to each
other by laser ISLs. Each orbit has a ﬁxed height above
sea level; under 2000 km is considered LEO. This relative
closeness to the ground provides a great advantage in terms
of communication latency, as the signal has to travel a much
Shared uplink
4 GbpsShared ISL
20 GbpsFigure 1: Satellite forwarding. Satellite-enabled hosts com-
municate with the satellites overhead using radio up- and
downlinks. Trafﬁc is routed from satellite to satellite via ISLs.
shorter distance to reach the satellite than, for example, to
reach Geostationary satellites at 35 ;786 km.
In most proposed constellations, the orbital planes do not
intersect the Equatorial plane at a 90 °angle, and thus do not
transit over the Earth’s poles. Instead, a lower inclination
angle is used to allow the satellites to spend more time at
lower latitudes, thus improving coverage above more popu-
lous areas, whilst avoiding the polar regions.
Our analysis throughout uses the ﬁrst shell of the SpaceX
Starlink constellation, for which the above parameters are: 72
orbital planes, each with 22satellites, a height of 550 km , and
an orbital inclination of 53° [60, 61, 63].
Satellite–ground connectivity . Figure 1 shows a typical
LSN communication scenario. Terminal units (TUs) are in-
stalled at the clients on the ground. Each satellite can simul-
taneously connect with multiple TUs, thanks to their multi-
beam antennas [17]. We call the aggregate capacity incoming
to and outgoing from a satellite its uplink anddownlink re-
spectively. Based on recent FCC ﬁlings [60, 61], our analysis
assumes both up- and downlink capacities to be 4 Gbps.
TUs can communicate with overhead satellites that are
above a minimum elevation angle over the horizon. The angle
varies from constellation to constellation, and expresses a
trade-off between the size of the coverage area or footprint of
a satellite, and the rate of communication achievable. Greater
elevation angles translate to smaller footprints, but also force
shorter paths inside the atmosphere and allow for better fre-
quency reuse, thus increasing capacity. For Starlink’s shell I,
the minimum elevation angle is planned to be 40°.
Inter-satellite connectivity . A key feature of the proposed
constellations is the use of laser inter-satellite links (ISLs) on
each satellite.1A typical approach is to have 4ISLs per satel-
lite, two connected to fore and aft satellites in the same orbital
plane, and two to satellites in adjacent orbital planes [69].
The resulting ISL topology is used to transit trafﬁc between
TUs. As shown in Fig. 1, trafﬁc can be forwarded from a TU
to a satellite in view through an uplink, then across multiple
ISLs, and ﬁnally to the destination via a downlink.
Some constellations, particularly during early stages of
deployment, may forego ISLs, instead transiting data through
a series of up and down transmissions between ground stations
1SpaceX recently launched ISL-capable satellites [59], and Telesat has
started producing them [65].
318    2021 USENIX Annual Technical Conference USENIX Association

===== PAGE 4 =====
and satellites; this is, for instance, the case for Starlink in its
ﬁrst stages of deployment. However, ISLs are expected to
be a key component of future LSNs, including more mature
deployments of Starlink, and are crucial to achieving many
of their beneﬁts [10, 28, 29]. We therefore focus our analysis
on the setting with ISLs; no-ISL LSNs are a strictly easier
attack target: ground–satellite links will have a much lower
capacity than ISLs, with each satellite supporting a few Gbps
of uplink at most, simplifying the adversary’s goal of creating
congestion. On the other hand, previous work [17] and laser
equipment vendors’ offerings [47] suggest that ISLs will be
able transfer up to 20 Gbps full-duplex, greatly increasing the
capacity of the network.
Beneﬁts: global low-latency broadband . With their hun-
dreds to thousands of satellites, each providing multi-gigabit
connectivity, LSNs can blanket the globe with broadband In-
ternet. Besides their potential to extend the Internet’s coverage
to under-served regions, LSNs are also generating excitement
due to their potential for low-latency connectivity even in
already well-connected areas. Prior work [10] estimates that
LSNs could reduce latency for long-distance routes by more
than 2compared to today’s Internet. Two factors contribute
to this reduced latency: ﬁrst, the speed of light in vacuum
is roughly 50% higher than the speed of light in the glass
medium of optical ﬁber. Second, a series of ISLs can often
provide a more direct path between TUs than what ﬁber can
achieve on the ground.
2.2 Denial of service
The term denial of service encompasses a large class of at-
tacks. DoS attacks can target different resources at different
layers in the network. We are interested in discovering and
analyzing the threats to communication that are peculiar to
LSNs, and that arise from the characteristics we have pre-
sented in the previous section. During a volumetric DDoS
attack, a botmaster directs the trafﬁc of thousands to millions
ofbots [3], i.e., compromised hosts, towards a target element
in the network, overwhelming it. The botnet is usually com-
posed of bots distributed across the globe; and targets can
be servers, end-hosts, routers, etc. Traditional DDoS attacks
send trafﬁc to a target end-point. Newer attacks like Coremelt
and Crossﬁre are designed to congest in-network elements
instead—their approach to send trafﬁc between bots or to initi-
ate connections to a variety of public servers deﬁes traditional
methods to classify trafﬁc into legitimate and unwanted.
Coremelt & Crossﬁre . In Coremelt [64], the adversary
tries to congest a target inter-domain linkby making use of
legitimate-looking ﬂows generated between the Nbots of a
botnet. Given the knowledge of the N
2
paths between the
bots, the adversary can initiate ﬂows that will cross the target
link. With sufﬁcient resources, the adversary can successfully
congest any link in the network.
Crossﬁre [31] expands on this idea. With Crossﬁre, the
adversary is able to hinder communication between entireregions of a network, as bots simultaneously connect to strate-
gically selected servers, thus creating overload on the links
leading into the region under attack.
Both attacks have been notoriously hard to mitigate, since
the adversary uses indistinguishable, legitimate trafﬁc. In § 7
we argue that ICARUS poses an even larger threat, as the few
mitigations available against Coremelt and Crossﬁre cannot
be directly employed.
3 ICARUS adversary model
The ICARUS adversary controls a botnet of compromised
hosts equipped with TUs that connect to the LSN. These bots
are exploited by the adversary to send trafﬁc over the LSN
to congest links and disrupt communications between other
TUs controlled by benign users.
3.1 The adversary’s objective
The adversary seeks to generate legitimate-looking trafﬁc that,
by careful selection of source and destination bots, disrupts
target communications by exhausting the capacity of certain
LSN links. More concretely, the adversary may target:
•A satellite uplink or downlink . This is the easiest attack,
as these are the lowest bandwidth links in an LSN.
•An ISL . Congesting ISLs is a potentially more disruptive
attack, as they carry trafﬁc for more source-destination
pairs. However, they are also more difﬁcult to attack than
uplinks and downlinks, as they have higher capacity.
•Multiple links . We also consider multi-link attacks,
in which the adversary selects a combination of target
ISLs and/or up/downlinks to achieve a broader attack
effect. For example, the adversary could try to con-
gest allthe links in the load-balancing set for a target
source-destination communication, or to target all links
connecting two large terrestrial areas.
Our simulations label a link congested when aggregate trafﬁc
demand across it exceeds its capacity. In practice, degradation
of communication starts before this threshold.
3.2 Metrics of attack success
For any of the above targets, the adversary is interested in
causing disruption at low cost and while avoiding detection .
Cost . Attack cost measures the resources an adversary has
to deploy to successfully achieve their attack’s goals. We
express cost as the trafﬁc volume (in Gbps ) the adversary has
to generate to be successful. With each bot generating tens of
Mbps of attack trafﬁc, as seen in initial measurements from
Starlink [5,11], an ISL’s 20Gbps worth of capacity translates
to, e.g., 500 bots each sending 40 Mbps.
Detectability and maxUp . If the LSN operator sees large
changes in how much trafﬁc a certain satellite receives on its
uplink, the operator could potentially localize and identify the
compromised bots. Thus, to reduce detectability, the adver-
sary would distribute attack trafﬁc across numerous uplinks.
To characterize detectability, we use the maximum absolute
USENIX Association 2021 USENIX Annual Technical Conference    319

===== PAGE 5 =====
bandwidth increase caused by the attack trafﬁc across the
uplinks of the LSN (maxUp). We use the absolute increase,
rather than relative, to obtain comparable results from simula-
tions with different baseline trafﬁc models.
3.3 The adversary’s capabilities & constraints
Unlike terrestrial networks, many aspects of an LSN’s opera-
tions are public knowledge or can be inferred.
LSN topology . Satellite orbits are public-domain informa-
tion constantly updated and published by NORAD [12]. From
these, an adversary can precisely compute the positions of the
satellites for a chosen attack time; the error in such computa-
tions is at most a few kilometers per day into the future [32].
As noted earlier (§2), the ISL interconnect is expected to be
a typical cross pattern. The design capacity of all links is
also known through public regulatory ﬁlings. Thus, we as-
sume full advance knowledge of the LSN topology. Moreover,
changes in the shortest paths happen on timescales of seconds.
As the maximum forwarding latency in the network is about
125 ms, the adversary can look at the LSN in snapshots [10],
and compute the attacks for successions of snapshots. They
can thus avoid the complexity of continuous satellite motion.
Routing . The topology is known, as is the propagation
delay across each link at all times. Therefore, given frequent
measurements of latency between a large set of bots, the
adversary can determine how routes are being chosen. This
is a much simpler setting for network tomography than one
where the topology and forwarding latencies are unknown.
If routing is deterministic, e.g., shortest-path routing, the
adversary can compute the full forwarding path for any source-
destination pair ahead of time. If routing is randomized, e.g.,
for load balancing across near-shortest paths, we assume the
adversary knows the algorithm with which the load-balancing
setis constructed. The adversary therefore knows in advance
the possible paths trafﬁc will take, but not the actual path
selected for forwarding a particular ﬂow.
Bot locations & availability . A key promise of LSNs is
global coverage, thus providing diverse locations for potential
bots. Even if terminals themselves are secure, it sufﬁces to
compromise the user devices connected through them, and
therefore exploits used today to create botnets directly apply
in the case of a satellite-enabled botnet. We thus assume
that the adversary can compromise TUs at any location on
land. Given that such TUs, even today [66], feature GNSS2-
based self-location to aid signal acquisition from satellites,
the adversary accurately knows the locations of their bots.
Regarding the size of the botnet, we do not constrain the
number of compromised TUs at any location beyond the lim-
its imposed by the capacity of uplinks. We will later show
that successful attacks only require hundreds to thousands
of compromised TUs—a very small fraction of the tens of
millions of TUs expected to be available globally (SpaceX
has sought permits for 5 million TUs in the US alone [62]).
2Global Navigation Satellite System.Attack control channel . We assume that the adversary can
coordinate the bot army through a command-and-control chan-
nel, which is typical for modern botnets. As we show later,
the advance knowledge of the topology, the routing algorithm,
and the bot locations, allows the adversary to pre-compute and
disseminate to the bots their attack trafﬁc commands ahead of
time. Fine-grained time-synchronization across bots would
only be needed if the adversary sought to create extremely
short-term congestion (e.g., for tens of milliseconds) [36, 55].
This would easily be possible through GNSS.
3.4 Unique attack opportunities & challenges
The above discussion highlights that an adversary targeting
LSNs has several advantages compared to one targeting tradi-
tional terrestrial networks.
•An adversary has full access to the network topology. The
positions of the satellites are published regularly [12], and
can be predicted with high accuracy into the future [32].
The design detail of the interconnections, moreover, can be
deduced from the FCC requests that the satellite operators
are mandated to ﬁle. In contrast, the topology of terrestrial
networks is concealed, and may even be obfuscated [44].
•Given the LSN’s global exposure, the adversary can recruit
bots in diverse locations for generating attack trafﬁc.
•The low-latency goal of LSNs leads to routing predictabil-
ity, as shortest or near-shortest paths must be used.
•For already well-connected regions, the primary value of an
LSN is low latency, as terrestrial ﬁber routes will be cheaper.
This lowers an adversary’s burden: between a target source-
destination pair, the adversary must only deteriorate a small
set of desirable (low-latency) paths, instead of needing to
congest a cut in the network graph.
•Our analysis of the topology and path structure of an LSN
shows that certain links are more vulnerable than others,
providing easy targets for an adversary.
•Exploiting the system’s predictability, communication with
the bots can be asynchronous, making traditional detection
of the command and control trafﬁc difﬁcult.
However, some aspects of the LSN setting also pose chal-
lenges to the adversary:
•Each bot has limited resources, and the pool of bots avail-
able is only a small fraction of Internet-connected hosts
that could otherwise be purposed as bots. It is thus even
more crucial for an adversary to keep attack cost low.
•The adversary needs to ensure that their limited attack re-
sources are not wasted by self-congestion, whereby trafﬁc
from its bots congests links before reaching the target links.
•Congesting some satellite’s uplink exploiting a large num-
ber of bots directly underneath is counter to the adversary’s
need to avoid detection. The LSN is a centrally-managed,
intra-domain network, and therefore has better monitoring
and policing capabilities than terrestrial transit networks.
320    2021 USENIX Annual Technical Conference USENIX Association

===== PAGE 6 =====
Thus, the adversary has to be especially stealthy, and em-
ploy more distant and diffuse collections of bots.
•If the LSN uses randomized load balancing across multi-
ple paths, this results in routing unpredictability for the
adversary, requiring a probabilistic approach that would
potentially consume more resources.
Our attack methods exploit the aforementioned unique oppor-
tunities, while addressing the new challenges.
4 ICARUS attack: shortest-path routing
We ﬁrst discuss our ICARUS denial-of-service attack against
an LSN in the simpler setting, where the LSN uses single
shortest-path routing. While this provides low latency, the
deterministic routing aids the adversary.
4.1 Attack mechanism
Paths in an LSN are typically stable on the order of sec-
onds (§ 3.3). Thus, the adversary can compute the ﬂows
the bots must send on a static snapshot of the network, and
use the same ﬂow assignment for seconds before issuing a
new one. Note that the adversary is also aware of the times
when paths will change, and can plan their ﬂow assignments
for change-free periods. The assignments can be sent asyn-
chronously to the bots for several periods in advance, as the
entire system is fully predictable on a much longer timescale.
For a particular system snapshot, the set of attack ﬂows is
computed as follows, similarly to Crossﬁre [31]:
A1Link and path discovery. The adversary uses the known
inter-satellite topology to create a connectivity graph.
They compute all the satellite in view of each bot, and
add an uplink and a downlink for each reachable satellite
to the connectivity graph. Finally, the adversary runs
Dijkstra’s algorithm for all the N(N 1)=2pairs of bots
to ﬁnd the forwarding paths.
A2Path ﬁltering. For a given target link or links, the ad-
versary ﬁnds all bot-pairs whose shortest path traverses
the target(s). The adversary retains only the paths that
traverse the target(s) in the desired (attacked) direction.
A3a Feasible attack ﬂow computation. The adversary must de-
cide how much trafﬁc to send on the chosen attack paths
between its bot-pairs. The adversary checks if there ex-
ists a ﬂow assignment such that (i) the target links are
just above capacity, and (ii) no other links are congested.
Satisfying these constraints ensures that the target(s) can
be congested without the attack trafﬁc self-congesting,
i.e., being bottlenecked before reaching them. This ap-
proach minimizes cost in terms of attack bandwidth.
A3b Reducing maxUp. IfA3a produces a feasible attack ﬂow,
the adversary iteratively optimizes maxUp. Recall that
maxUp, D, is the maximum attack trafﬁc volume across
the uplinks. At each iteration i, the adversary lowers the
permissible attack trafﬁc volume on all uplinks, Di; then
they perform the feasibility check again. This processis repeated until the minimum value, Dmin, is found, for
which the attack is still feasible.
4.2 Evaluation setup
We evaluate the above attack strategy is terms of how its
cost and maxUp depend on the attack scenario. The attack
scenario varies the targets, i.e., either individual links or sets
of links, and what type of benign trafﬁc already uses the LSN.
Throughout, we use simulations on the SpaceX Starlink
shell I constellation (§2) with a total of 1584 satellites. Note
however, that our evaluation framework supports arbitrary
constellations; an example set of results for a different conﬁg-
uration is included in §D in the Supplemental materials. We
assume that bots and benign TUs can be located at any point
on land. To keep the simulations tractable, we discretize the
continuous space of geolocations to a regular geodesic grid.
This is done in the form of a triangular tiling of the planet
that, when restricted to land areas, amounts to a total of 1761
possible positions. (The restriction to land areas is driven
by our below models of benign trafﬁc, which are based on
population and economic activity.) Each of the triangular tiles
represents an area of 100;000 km2. Since a single Starlink
satellite covers an area ten times this size, this grid sufﬁces to
capture the nuances of different TU placement relative to the
same satellite.
We test three trafﬁc scenarios for benign trafﬁc on the LSN:
•Empty network: This case, with no benign trafﬁc, serves
as a baseline, comparing against which, we can under-
stand the impact of existing trafﬁc.
•GDP trafﬁc: A “gravity” sampling model, where proba-
bility of adding 10 Mbps of benign trafﬁc between two
locations is proportional to the product of their Gross Do-
mestic Product (GDP) [48]. Each tile’s centroid serves as
a trafﬁc source/sink location, with the aggregate GDP for
the tile’s area being this location’s GDP weight. We then
sample 250k times, discarding the samples that, if added,
would exceed 90% of the capacity on the links. This
process results in a utilization of 28% of the on-land up-
link capacity. This model treats trafﬁc as proportional to
economic activity, representing the view that the biggest
economic centers will drive trafﬁc and revenue.
•Pop trafﬁc: Another gravity model similar to the above,
except the population is used as the weight instead of
GDP [13]. This model represents the scenario where the
LSN’s primary role is improving coverage in regions that
are populous but still poorly connected. For this model,
we get 34% utilization.
All the simulations in the following are executed by our
LSN simulation framework (~5000 lines of Python code).
4.3 Single link target scenarios
Attacking an uplink . The outcome of the attack on an
uplink is easy to determine: either the adversary has enough
bots in the area of coverage of the victim satellite uplink, or
USENIX Association 2021 USENIX Annual Technical Conference    321

===== PAGE 7 =====
the attack cannot succeed. This attack has therefore maximum
maxUp in our model, as the adversary has to completely ﬁll
the uplink with attack trafﬁc.
Downlinks . Unlike uplinks, downlinks can be reached
from arbitrarily afar, and therefore the adversary can more
easily ﬁnd bots to congest them. In theory, the attack ﬂows
can self-congest: as the attack trafﬁc ﬂows towards the target
downlink, more and more ﬂows join paths, ﬁlling the ISLs
leading up to the target. While this can violate constraint ii)
inA3a (§ 4.1), it is unlikely for an attack on a downlink —
all the ISLs preceding the target downlink can carry 5the
bandwidth needed to congest the downlink. As a result, our
simulations reveal that alldownlinks from satellites located
over land are attackable in this manner. As our model does
not allow TUs in the seas, there is no way to congest down-
links for the remaining satellites. We also veriﬁed that this
result remains the same regardless of our three trafﬁc models,
as even with benign trafﬁc, there is always enough leftover
capacity in the network for the relatively small amount of
attack trafﬁc bandwidth required.
ISLs . ISLs have higher bandwidth than up-/down-links,
making an attack more complicated and more costly to
achieve. Not only is more attack trafﬁc needed to cause
congestion on an ISL compared to a downlink, but also
self-congestion does often occur in practice for attack ﬂows
headed to a target ISL. This often results in there being no
feasible attack ﬂow. Consequently, of the 6336 possible ISL
target links ( 1584 satellites, each with 4ISLs, counting both
directions), we ﬁnd that in an empty network scenario, 5470
(86%) are feasible. With GDP or Pop trafﬁc, this drops to
72% and71% respectively. This is along expected lines: be-
nign trafﬁc reduces the available capacity on the attack ﬂow
paths, limiting the attack trafﬁc that reaches the target.
An interesting ﬁnding from our simulations is that with all
three models, of the end-to-end paths with at least one ISL,
fewer than 0:6%do not contain at least one ISL the adversary
can congest. Therefore, this attack can disrupt > 99:4%of all
communications that rely on an ISL.
Cost and maxUp . In the above, we have only discussed
feasibility for each individual targeted link: for uplinks, feasi-
bility depends simply on having enough bots under the target
uplink; all downlinks over land are feasible to attack; and
for ISLs, self-congestion limits feasibility, with the details
dependent on the benign trafﬁc. For the feasible attacks, we
can also analyze attack cost and maxUp.
Figure 2 shows the cost and maxUp of attacks against all
links that are feasible to attack (downlinks and ISLs together;
uplinks are uninteresting as discussed, and thus omitted) for
all three trafﬁc models. From the cost graphic (top), we see
that for the empty network, there are only two modes in the
CDF — all downlinks cost 0:2and all ISLs cost 1to attack.
(We present costs normalized to one ISL’s bandwidth, i.e.,
20 Gbps; recall that downlinks have one-ﬁfth the capacity of
an ISL.) This is as expected: in an otherwise empty network,
Figure 2: Cost and maxUp of single-target attacks. While
maxUp is similarly distributed either with or without baseline
trafﬁc, attack cost decreases signiﬁcantly.
congesting any link requires sending the target link’s capacity
worth of trafﬁc. In the presence of benign trafﬁc, for both
trafﬁc models, the attack cost is lower, as the adversary needs
to add a smaller amount of trafﬁc to the existing benign trafﬁc.
In terms of number of bots, a cost of 1translates to a few
hundred bots sending tens of Mbps each (§ 3.2). The maxUp
plot (Fig. 2, below) shows the distribution of maxUp across
attacks on different target links. We normalize maxUp to
one uplink’s bandwidth, such that needing to fully saturate a
satellite’s uplink is the worst case for the adversary, and means
that maxUp is 1. The maxUp of an attack on the median
target link is below 0:13in the empty network scenario. Thus,
themaximum satellite uplink bandwidth consumed across
attack ﬂows sent towards these target links comprises roughly
one-eighth of an uplink’s bandwidth. Adding benign trafﬁc
to the network with either trafﬁc model further lowers the
adversary’s risk of detection.
While adding benign trafﬁc decreases attack cost and low-
ers maxUp for those target links that are feasible to attack, it
actually decreases the fraction of feasible target links. How-
ever, closer inspection shows that this is not a particularly
severe problem for the adversary: the links that become less
vulnerable when benign trafﬁc is present are mostly above
the oceans, and not the higher-value ones over the more pop-
ulous regions (further analysis is presented in §A.1 in the
Supplemental materials).
4.4 Multi-link region disconnection scenarios
Beyond attacking individual links and communications that
traverse them, an adversary may seek to hamper all commu-
nication between two large geographic areas. To do so, they
must congest allpaths connecting the two regions simultane-
ously. This makes the attack more challenging: the adversary
now has to carefully select the set of target links to congest,
such that hampering region-region connectivity incurs low
cost and has low maxUp. Figure 3 shows an example in which
322    2021 USENIX Annual Technical Conference USENIX Association

===== PAGE 8 =====
Desirable paths 
connecting the zones
Undesirable path
- not considered-
BottlenecksFigure 3: Example of region disconnection. Although 12
distinct shortest paths are available between North-western
America and North-western Australia, just 3 bottlenecks suf-
ﬁce to prevent communication between these large zones.
Figure 4: Cost and maxUp of zone disconnection attacks.
As shown by the marginals, maxUp is low for most attacks.
The peaks shown in the cost marginal correspond to the num-
ber of bottlenecks in the paths between the zones.
the adversary intelligently selects 3 bottlenecks shared across
the 12 different paths, greatly reducing the attack cost. In
many cases, however, the choice is not as obvious.
The adversary has to select the minimum set of links it is
able to attack simultaneously , among the ones in the paths
connecting the zones, such that their congestion results in a
complete disconnection. Unfortunately, this problem is equiv-
alent to the minimum set cover problem (we prove equiv-
alence in §B in the Supplemental materials), which is NP-
hard [34]. To avoid exponential explosion, we use a heuristic
which computes a good approximation of the set of links to
attack in polynomial time. Each link in the paths to congest is
assigned a score, equal to the ratio between the maxUp of the
attack on the link, and the number of paths that share the link.
The lower this score, the stealthier it is to attack such a link.
We therefore add the link with the lowest score to the attack
set, we remove it from the network alongside all the paths it
congests, and ﬁnally recompute the scores for all remaining
links. We continue this procedure until all paths are congested.
We run this heuristic three times, slightly varying the order in
which links are removed, and keep the lowest maxUp result.Simulation results . We iteratively sample 5000 pairs of re-
gions, each comprising six points on the geodesic grid (§ 4.2).
For each pair, we run the attack twice, inverting source and
destination region, for a total of 9658 viable attack cases
(some are discarded because the zones are overlapping). The
results are shown in Fig. 4.
We ﬁnd that 9208 of these zone pairs ( 95%) can be success-
fully attacked. The median maxUp of these attacks is 0:10,
implying that attacking large regions does not expose the ad-
versary more than the single-link attacks (where the maxUp
was 0:13). The minor difference in maxUp arises because
the zone construction algorithm prevents some of the corner
cases that increase the median maxUp in the single-link at-
tacks. Since zones are composed by multiple grid points, they
have to be located farther away from the edges of satellite
connectivity (high latitudes, or narrow corners of continents),
thus giving the adversary more uplinks on which to distribute
the attack trafﬁc. Finally, the overall cost is mainly driven by
the number of bottlenecks found (characterized by the spikes
in the marginal in Fig. 4), which is consistently below 4.
5 ICARUS against more sophisticated routing
We use the single shortest path routing setting discussed thus
far primarily to develop intuition about the vulnerabilities of
an LSN, and to broadly understand an adversary’s tradeoffs.
In practice, the more likely scenario entails the LSN load-
balancing trafﬁc across multiple paths. We therefore consider
several candidate routing schemes for such load balancing,
and then formulate and evaluate a modiﬁed attack strategy
suited for this more complex setting.
5.1 Candidate routing schemes
Developing, evaluating, and comparing new routing strategies
is not our objective, and has been tackled in some depth in
prior work (§ 8). However, to understand how load balancing
across multiple paths impacts an adversary, we must frame
some suitable routing methods. Here, we use one guiding
constraint: the chosen non-shortest paths must still be “near
shortest”, i.e., not increase latency by a large amount. In
the extreme, any path’s latency must not exceed that of a
terrestrial ﬁber route.3We thus evaluate the following multi-
path routing variants:
k-SP Shortest paths: This strategy load-balances trafﬁc
among the k-shortest source–destination paths.
k-DG Ground-to-ground disjoint paths: This strategy only
considers the kshortest paths that are node-disjoint,
i.e.,without shared uplinks, downlinks, or ISLs.
k-DS Satellite-to-satellite disjoint paths: This strategy is
similar to the above, with the exception that overlap
is allowed on uplinks and downlinks. Disjointness is
enforced exclusively on the ISLs.
3This ﬁber latency is estimated, based on past measurement work [58],
by multiplying the great-circle distance by a path-stretch factor of 1:53, and
then dividing by the speed of light in ﬁber, 2c=3.
USENIX Association 2021 USENIX Annual Technical Conference    323

===== PAGE 9 =====
k-LO Limited-overlap shortest paths: we implement the
ESX algorithm by Chondrogiannis et al. [15], a
heuristic that ﬁnds the shortest kpaths with a sim-
ilarity score of no more than 50%.
Note that sometimes these algorithms yield fewer than kpaths
because of the faster-than-ﬁber and path disjointness con-
straints. (For k-SP, only the former applies, and is only limit-
ing for nearby end-points.) Each algorithm considers different
types of near-shortest paths, varying the degree to which paths
overlap. k-SP, which does not limit overlap, typically offers
multiple paths with nearly the same latency as the shortest,
but risks the shared links across these paths becoming the
bottleneck. On the other extreme, the most restrictive scheme,
k-DG, typically does not even provide more than 4paths. Fur-
ther analysis of the path structure of these algorithms is in §C
in the Supplement. For each scheme, we assume that the LSN
uses randomized load balancing (similar to ECMP) across
the chosen path. Note that uniform random load balancing is
the worst case for the adversary; any deterministic adaptive
scheme will strictly reduce uncertainty for the adversary.
5.2 Probabilistic ICARUS
The use of load-balanced, uniformly randomized routing intro-
duces uncertainty in the link discovery phase. As the network
chooses the end-to-end path only at forwarding time, from a
set of kpre-computed paths, the adversary cannot know in ad-
vance which speciﬁc path will be taken by their attack trafﬁc.
We therefore present a probabilistic variation of ICARUS that
accounts for this uncertainty. This attack performs attack-ﬂow
assignment in such a way that the target link will be ﬂooded
with high probability, while avoiding self-congestion among
attack ﬂows, and lowering maxUp.
Congesting the target . The adversary pre-computes all the
load-balancing paths for all its bot source-destination pairs,
and considers those (s;d)-pairs for which at least one path
contains the target link. Consider an (s;d)-pair connected by
nkpaths, with mof them crossing the target link. Then the
event “the forwarding path chosen for this (s;d)-pair uses the
target link” can be described as a Bernoulli random variable
X(s;d)with probability of success p(s;d)=m=n. Suppose the
adversary uses an attack-ﬂow set A, comprising many (s;d)-
pairs. Then the sum Y=ås;d2AXs;d, is a random variable
describing the number of attack ﬂows that are forwarded
across the target link. The Xvariables are independent but
notidentically distributed, with different mandnacross (s;d)-
pairs, therefore Yfollows a Poisson binomial distribution.
The adversary’s goal is for the attack-ﬂow set, A, to be
such that at least Tattack ﬂows use the target link with high
probability. Here, Tis determined by each attack ﬂow’s
bandwidth, and the target link’s capacity; in our model, for
example, an ISL has a capacity of 20 Gbps ; if a single (s;d)-
pair can transmit 40 Mbps (3.2), Tis 500.
The target link is congested if YT. The adversary
wants to bound their probability of failure to at most a smallvalue, b, i.e., P[Y<T]b. The adversary can get more
certainty, i.e., lower b, at the expense of more resources.
The computation of P[Y<T]is infeasible for non-trivial
settings, but we can approximate it via the Chernoff (lower
tail) bound [46]:
P[Y<(1 d)µ]exp( µd2=2) (1)
where µ=E[Y]. By setting d=1 T
µin eq. (1), we get:
P[Y<T]exp( µ(1 T=µ)2=2)
Note that µ=E[Y] =å(s;d)2Ap(s;d)by the linearity of expec-
tation. The adversary can easily calculate µfor any attack-ﬂow
set,A. To ensure that P[Y<T]b, the adversary can pick
A’s constituent (s;d)-pairs such that they satisfy:
exp( µ(1 T=µ)2=2)b
For 0 <b<1 and 1T<µ, this is equivalent to:
µ>p
lnb(lnb 2T)+T lnb=µmin (2)
Avoiding self-congestion . The adversary must also ensure
that the attack ﬂows do not cause self-congestion, i.e., congest
other links before reaching the target. This problem, of not
congesting non-target links, requires the same machinery as
that above for congesting the target. For every non-target
link, l, we simply need to repeat analysis similar to the above,
except towards ensuring we do not congest l, i.e., Wl<Cl,
where Wlis a random variable describing the number of attack
ﬂows that traverse l, and Clisl’s capacity.
Saygis a parameter analogous to babove, indicating the
maximum acceptable risk of self-congestion. For any non-
target link, l,µl(analogous to µabove) is the expected number
of attack ﬂows crossing l, such that µl=å(s;d)p(s;d)for(s;d)-
pairs that traverse link l. Analysis similar to the above—but
considering the upper tail—yields, the following condition:
µl<1
2
 p
lng(lng 8Cl) lng+2Cl
=µl;max (3)
Probability of attack success . An attack is successful if
the target is congested without congesting any other link. We
combine the probabilities computed so far as follows:
P[success ] =1 P[failure ] (4)
=1 P[Y<T_W1C1__ WNCN](5)
U.B.
1  
P[Y<T]+N
å
l=1P[WlCl]!
(6)
1 (b+Ng) (7)
=1 a (8)
where eq. (6) is given by the union bound, and Nis the number
of non-target links. For a high probability of success, ahas
to be small. In our setting, Nis in the range 1500 –2000 . We
therefore choose g=1=N2=1=20002andb=0:1, which
gives P[success ]0:9. Empirically, we ﬁnd that the Chernoff
bound is quite loose, and for these values of bandgthe
success probability is higher ( 95%).
324    2021 USENIX Annual Technical Conference USENIX Association

===== PAGE 10 =====
Attack set construction . The adversary must construct the
attack-ﬂow set, A, such that it simultaneously satisﬁes the
constraints on µ, and for every non-target link l,µl:
µ=å
(s;d)2Ap(s;d)>µmin and (9a)
µl=å
(s;d)2Wlp(s;d)<µl;max8non-target links l(9b)
Since µis additive, we use a greedy approach:
• We sort the (s;d)-pairs by decreasing value of p(s;d).
•Iteratively, we add an (s;d)-pair to A, checking that
eq. (9b) holds. Otherwise, we discard the pair and move
on to the next one.
•We repeat this until either eq. (9a) is satisﬁed—in which
case the attack succeeds with probability 1 a, or
there are no more (s;d)-pairs, and the algorithm fails to
guarantee this probability of success.
The above approach yields the attack set with the minimum
number of (s;d)pairs. However, maxUp is not minimized,
and is (nearly) µmax=Cuplink . If the adversary wants to mini-
mize maxUp before cost, they can iteratively lower µl;maxfor
the uplinks to the minimum value such that the construction
ofAstill succeeds.
Further optimization . Due to the structure of the topology
and the routing schemes, for each target link, there are certain
(s;d)-pairs for which p(s;d)=1. In the above probabilistic
analysis, such (s;d)-pairs needlessly contribute to making the
probability bounds loose. Instead, they can be considered
separately, and the above analysis done after accounting for
those (s;d)-pairs.
5.3 Evaluation
We evaluate probabilistic ICARUS using the same constella-
tion, Starlink shell I, under the 4routing schemes from § 5.1,
with k=5paths, and uniform randomization across the paths.
We present results for the empty network scenario, without
any benign trafﬁc, as it is the costliest for the adversary.
We target a maximum attack failure probability aof10%,
and measure the cost for the adversary in terms of the size
of the attack set. A resilient routing scheme will force the
adversary to incur higher attack cost for the same a, while
vulnerable routing schemes will incur cost closer to the sin-
gle shortest-path routing case. Following this intuition, we
present attack costs for different routing schemes in compari-
son to the latter.
Fig. 5a and 5b show the attack cost for all 4routing
schemes, when the attacker optimizes for cost and for maxUp,
respectively. Surprisingly, 5-DG and 5-SP perform similarly,
even though they are very different: the former does not allow
any overlap between paths for the same (s;d)-pair, while in
the latter, path overlaps are not restricted at all. The com-
monality, however, is that the uncertainty in the forwarding
path is low for both. In 5-SP, this is due to the lack of sep-
aration between the 5absolute-shortest paths in the SN. In
(a)Cost CDF for the attacks, when executed with cost minimization.
For maxUp, please refer to text in § 5.2.
(b)Cost CDF for the attacks, when executed with maxUp
minimization. The cost increases signiﬁcantly compared to the
previous ﬁgure, to the beneﬁt of maxUp (below).
(c)MaxUp CDF for the attacks, when executed for maxUp
minimization.
Figure 5: Cost and maxUp of the attacks on all ISLs as-
suming different load-balancing strategies.
5-DG, on the other hand, the low uncertainty comes from the
lack of alternatives: between many (s;d)-pairs, this scheme is
overly restrictive and does not provide 5paths. The adversary
can use such (s;d)-pairs in the attack-ﬂow set, effectively
side-stepping routing uncertainty.
The most resilient scheme in terms of increasing the adver-
sary’s cost, is 5-DS. This scheme strikes a balance between
avoiding path overlap and being ﬂexible enough to maintain
enough path options: enforcing disjointness between satel-
lites is less limiting that ground-to-ground disjointness. The
median cost increase compared to single shortest-path routing
is385% with 5-DS. The price of this resilience is increased la-
tency — paths often incur more than 1:5latency compared
to the shortest path (Fig. 4 in the Supplemental materials).
Unfortunately, despite incurring a high latency cost, while
USENIX Association 2021 USENIX Annual Technical Conference    325

===== PAGE 11 =====
Link traﬀic (Gbps)+2.86 Gbps
-3.48 GbpsFigure 6: Load surges. The ﬁgure shows the link trafﬁc over
time of the 10links with the largest load surges. The biggest
positive ( —) and negative ( – –) surges are also highlighted.
Figure 7: Feasibility of pulsing attacks.
the percent-increase in cost seems large ( 385% ), in the abso-
lute, this is still under 80Gbps of attack trafﬁc, and botnets
with a few thousand bots (depending on per bot bandwidth)
can still congest the median LSN link. Note also that this cost
is in the most difﬁcult setting, i.e., without any benign trafﬁc,
with the LSN accepting a large latency deterioration, and with
the attacker seeking to absolutely minimize maxUp. Further,
valuable links above land are easier to attack. Figure 2 in the
Supplemental materials shows where the cost of the attack
is highest across the network’s ISLs, with 5-DS. Attacking
ISLs that are above land is easier because the adversary can
always ﬁnd a source-destination bot-pair for which there are
few, or greatly overlapping paths (reducing uncertainty).
For maxUp, shown in Fig. 5c, 5-SP is the outlier, with
higher maxUp than the other three schemes, for which re-
sults are similar. This is because other algorithms often have
multiple uplinks available in the same load-balancing set,
thus spreading the attack trafﬁc and reducing its maxUp. In
5-SP, paths mostly overlap, and especially on the uplinks,
preventing this effect.
6 Open problem: exploiting LSN dynamics
Thus far, the attacks we have presented consider only snap-
shots of the SN’s state, with the adversary drawing on the
relative stability of the network on the timescale of seconds topre-compute attack ﬂows. It is worth considering how/if the
adversary may exploit the LSN’s dynamics as an additional
opportunity, rather than a minor hindrance that requires per-
computed, albeit frequent, changes in the attack-ﬂow set. We
discuss two potential opportunities of this type.
Load surges . The motion of satellites naturally moves
ISLs across low- and high-utilization areas. As a result, the
network’s links see large ﬂuctuations in their utilization over
time. Figure 6 shows how the load changes in time across
the links with the biggest surges and drops over 130seconds
of simulation for the GDP trafﬁc model. An adversary that
knows or can reasonably guess the trafﬁc matrix of the LSN
can use these load surges to increase the effectiveness of
low-volume attacks: well-timed bursts that coincide with the
natural surges can cause high congestion, at a fraction of the
cost. The effectiveness of such an attack depends on the the
LSN’s protocol stack, e.g., how long does congestion control
take to detect such short, transient congestion, and how does
it react and recover? Addressing this requires packet-level
analysis, and is left to future work.
Pulsing attacks . Another dynamic feature of an LSN is the
time-varying latency of paths. Consider a bot that has a path
to a destination, d, across a target link. Over time, this bot’s
path to dchanges, with some of these changes still traversing
the target, but potentially over a higher- or lower-latency path,
resulting from satellite motion. When the path changes from
a higher latency one to a lower latency one, the adversary can
potentially double the effective attack bandwidth of the bot:
trafﬁc sent on the ﬁrst and the second path will traverse the
target link simultaneously for a short time interval. This “puls-
ing attack” bears similarities to temporal lensing [55], with
the important difference that temporal lensing uses external
infrastructure like DNS to create a time difference between
the forwarding paths, while in LSNs this is provided by the
network’s inherent dynamics.
We brieﬂy test the feasibility of pulsing attacks by running
the following experiment:
1.At each time-step, we consider a target link, and compute
all the paths across it.
2.We identify paths that will not be valid in the next time-
step, and compute their replacement paths.
3.For each changed path, we compute the difference in
latency from the source to the target link, between the
original path and its replacement.
We run this procedure for all 6336 target links in a 130-sec
simulation, and a time-step of 1sec for evaluating changes.
Figure 7 shows the results for a few routing schemes. For
single shortest-path routing, achieving latency differences of
tens of milliseconds across the path change is possible less
than once per simulation second across the entire constella-
tion. The multipath schemes increase this opportunity, but
it is nevertheless small: even for the most favorable algo-
rithm, 5-DS, there are only 8133 pulses with a duration above
326    2021 USENIX Annual Technical Conference USENIX Association

===== PAGE 12 =====
50 ms . Since there are 6336 target ISLs, the adversary can
beneﬁt from little more than 1pulse per ISL, on average, over
the entire 130sec of the simulation. Thus, while pulsing is
possible in principle, its utility for an adversary is limited to
occasionally impacting a small number of targets.
Future outlook . Our above analysis indicates positive po-
tential for load surges, and a largely negative result for pulsing.
Exploring other methods for an adversary to leverage LSN
dynamism, as well as a deeper understanding of the impact
of load surges, are left to future work.
7 Mitigations
We ﬁnd that several traditional methods of addressing DDoS
attacks are not applicable against ICARUS :
•Overprovisioning to absorb more than expected trafﬁc
is difﬁcult: our model already accounts for ISLs having
higher capacity than access links, and increasing ISL ca-
pacity or number will push against the cost, weight and
power constraints of the satellites.
•In-network ﬁltering [4, 26, 39, 42, 45, 54] requires compu-
tational resources, which are lacking at both the satellites
and the TUs (TUs often need to be portable). More fun-
damentally, like Coremelt and Crossﬁre, attack trafﬁc is
indistinguishable from benign trafﬁc. Therefore, even if
satellites or TUs have the computational capabilities for ﬁl-
tering, it is unclear how they would distinguish malicious
and benign trafﬁc.
•Capabilities in the form of cryptographic tokens that pro-
vide access rights [2, 37, 38, 40, 52, 72] are not useful here
either — the adversary compromises legitimate satellite-
connected users to gain access to the LSN; thus inheriting
these users’ capabilities.
•Cloud-based mitigations [1, 16, 21, 24, 41, 51] ofﬂoad the
ﬁltering of adversarial trafﬁc to the cloud. Since TUs will
often use the LSN as their last-mile provider, the burden of
passing trafﬁc through a cloud provider falls on the LSN,
incurring additional bandwidth and latency overheads.
Thus, effective defenses against Coremelt and Crossﬁre—
such as upgrading capacity or re-routing trafﬁc to more capa-
ble networks—cannot be used to alleviate ICARUS ’ impact. In
light of the above, we discuss two avenues that show promise
towards neutralizing ICARUS .
Resilient routing and network design . Our experiments
in § 5.2 show that resilient routing can greatly increase the at-
tack’s cost. While for our tested routing schemes, this comes
at the expense of increased latency, we have only scratched
the surface in exploring resilient routing; identifying rout-
ing schemes with the most favorable tradeoff curve remains
an interesting direction for future work. Another possibility
is to attack the problem using network topology design —
Bhattacherjee et al. [10] have recently proposed to re-arrange
ISLs, deviating from the traditional “cross” pattern, to im-
prove forwarding latency. A similar strategy can be used in anadversarial setting: altering the structure of the network can
improve resilience to attacks with minimal impact on latency.
Trafﬁc separation and differential pricing . In this work,
we assume that all TUs are equally capable, and optimized
for low-latency communication. It is foreseeable, however,
that not all hosts will require such an optimization. This
consideration opens up the opportunity of creating different
classes of service, with a premium service offering the low-
est latency and highest resilience, at the expense of shifting
other trafﬁc to longer, less predictable paths. It remains to be
seen, however, whether this introduces enough randomness
in forwarding to make the attacks too costly to perform, or if,
instead, the higher resource usage caused by more circuitous
paths increases vulnerability.
8 Other related work
We discuss related work not already covered in § 2 or § 7.
Attacks on satellite systems . The most commonly rec-
ognized threat to satellite communications on the physical
layer is jamming [30, 49, 56]: the adversary uses high-power
antennas to induce noise on up- and downlinks, preventing
the endpoints from reaching the ingress satellite. ICARUS is
however beyond detection by a jamming analyzer as it uses
protocol-compliant trafﬁc from authorized (albeit compro-
mised) sources. GNSS spooﬁng is another well-understood
threat, with a long list of attacks and mitigations [57]. More
recently, the attention has shifted towards the security of cryp-
tographic standards used in satellite communications [18],
and lack thereof [50].
Network-layer denial of service on LSNs has been ad-
dressed, to the best of our knowledge, only recently by Usman
et al. [67]. However, their focus is on traditional geostation-
ary orbit satellite networks, using only bent-pipe connectivity
through satellites, without any notion of ISLs. The authors
thus focus on ping ﬂooding to exhaust control plane resources
at GS network devices. In contrast, our work examines a
completely different setting with modern LSNs, analyzing an
entirely different breed of attacks: congestion-causing volu-
metric DDoS attacks from distributed bots. To the best of our
knowledge, we are the ﬁrst to frame and study this problem.
Routing in satellite constellations . Given the dynamic na-
ture of links in LSNs, many works focus on the challenges
of discovering and disseminating network status information,
and optimizing forwarding latency [14,19,20,22,23,27,43,53,
68–71,73]. Barrit et al. [6 –8] bring software-deﬁned network-
ing (SDN) to LSNs, and introduce the Temporospatial-SDN.
The SDN controller uses the predictability of satellite orbits
to maintain an accurate view of the LSN’s topology, and aid
routing decisions. Despite this past work, the subject of opti-
mizing routing for resilience against an ICARUS -like attacker
remains an open question.
USENIX Association 2021 USENIX Annual Technical Conference    327

===== PAGE 13 =====
9 Conclusion
We present ICARUS , the ﬁrst volumetric DDoS attack against
next-generation LSNs. We demonstrate ICARUS ’s disruptive
potential across a variety of scenarios, with different LSN
routing schemes, and different attack targets. ICARUS ’s po-
tency stems from leveraging several unique characteristics of
LSNs, whereby the adversary operates with greater informa-
tion than available for terrestrial networks, and exploits the
topology and path structure of LSNs. ICARUS also turns the
low-latency and global coverage objectives of LSNs into vul-
nerabilities. Nevertheless, successful attacks of such networks
require careful limitation of cost and detectability (character-
ized with the maxUp metric), as ICARUS does. In addition,
randomized multipath routing increases an adversary’s cost,
but as we experimentally show, ICARUS also succeeds in that
setting. We hope that our ﬁrst steps in understanding the vul-
nerability of LSNs to DDoS will seed the ground for further
research on this topic. To this end, we release our simula-
tion framework, which is the ﬁrst tool for analyzing DDoS
attacks and defences on LSNs. It allows easy testing of the
resilience of arbitrary constellation conﬁgurations and novel
path-selection algorithms.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to our anonymous reviewers and our shepherd
Gerd Zellweger for their insightful feedback and valuable
suggestions. We gratefully acknowledge ﬁnancial support
from ETH Zurich and from the Zurich Information Security
and Privacy Center (ZISC).
References
[1]Amazon. Amazon AWS shield. https://aws.
amazon.com/shield/ , 2020.
[2]Tom Anderson, Timothy Roscoe, and David Wetherall.
Preventing Internet denial-of-service with capabilities.
ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review ,
34(1):39–44, 2004.
[3]Manos Antonakakis, Tim April, Michael Bailey, Matt
Bernhard, Elie Bursztein, Jaime Cochran, Zakir Du-
rumeric, J. Alex Halderman, Luca Invernizzi, Michalis
Kallitsis, Deepak Kumar, Chaz Lever, Zane Ma, Joshua
Mason, Damian Menscher, Chad Seaman, Nick Sulli-
van, Kurt Thomas, and Yi Zhou. Understanding the
Mirai Botnet. In USENIX Security Symposium , pages
1093–1110, 2017.
[4]K. Argyraki and D.R. Cheriton. Active internet trafﬁc
ﬁltering: Real-time response to denial-of-service attacks.
USENIX Annual Technical Conference , pages 135–148,
2005.
[5]Ars Technica. SpaceX Starlink speeds revealed
as beta users get downloads of 11 to 60mbps.
https://arstechnica.com/information-technology/2020/08/spacex-starlink-beta-
tests-show-speeds-up-to-60mbps-latency-as-
low-as-31ms/ , 2020.
[6]Brian Barritt and Wesley Eddy. Temporospatial SDN for
aerospace communications. In AIAA SPACE Conference
and Exposition , 2015.
[7]Brian Barritt, Tatiana Kichkaylo, Ketan Mandke, Adam
Zalcman, and Victor Lin. Operating a UA V mesh &
internet backhaul network using temporospatial SDN.
InIEEE Aerospace Conference , 2017.
[8]Brian J. Barritt and Wesley Eddy. SDN enhancements
for LEO satellite networks. In AIAA International
Communications Satellite Systems Conference , 2016.
[9]Debopam Bhattacherjee, Waqar Aqeel, Ilker Nadi
Bozkurt, Anthony Aguirre, Balakrishnan Chan-
drasekaran, P. Brighten Godfrey, Gregory Laughlin,
Bruce Maggs, and Ankit Singla. Gearing up for the
21st century space race. In ACM Workshop on Hot
Topics in Networks - HotNets , 2018.
[10] Debopam Bhattacherjee and Ankit Singla. Network
topology design at 27,000 km/hour. In International
Conference on Emerging Networking Experiments And
Technologies - CoNEXT , 2019.
[11] Business Insider. Starlink’s speed tests may look
impressive, but experts say SpaceX’s satellite-internet
project is unlikely to win any federal subsidies.
https://www.businessinsider.com/spacex-
starlink-beta-speedtest-results-bandwidth-
ping-latency-fcc-rdof-2020-8 , 2020.
[12] CelesTrak. NORAD two-line element sets current data.
https://celestrak.com/NORAD/elements/ , 2020.
[13] Center For International Earth Science Infor-
mation Network-CIESIN-Columbia University.
Gridded Population of the World, Version 4
(GPWv4): Population Count, Revision 11. https:
//sedac.ciesin.columbia.edu/data/set/gpw-
v4-population-count-rev11 , 2018.
[14] Chao Chen, Eylem Ekici, and Ian F. Akyildiz. Satellite
grouping and routing protocol for LEO/MEO satellite IP
networks. In ACM international workshop on Wireless
mobile multimedia , 2002.
[15] Theodoros Chondrogiannis, Panagiotis Bouros, Johann
Gamper, Ulf Leser, and David B. Blumenthal. Find-
ing k-shortest paths with limited overlap. The VLDB
Journal , 29(5):1023–1047, 2020.
[16] CloudFlare. Comprehensive DDoS protection. https:
//www.cloudflare.com/ddos/ , 2020.
328    2021 USENIX Annual Technical Conference USENIX Association

===== PAGE 14 =====
[17] Inigo del Portillo, Bruce Cameron, and Edward Craw-
ley. Ground segment architectures for large LEO con-
stellations with feeder links in EHF-bands. In IEEE
Aerospace Conference , 2018.
[18] Benedikt Driessen, Ralf Hund, Carsten Willems,
Christof Paar, and Thorsten Holz. Don 't trust satellite
phones: A security analysis of two satphone standards.
InIEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy , 2012.
[19] E. Ekici, I.F. Akyildiz, and M.D. Bender. Datagram
routing algorithm for LEO satellite networks. In Pro-
ceedings IEEE INFOCOM. Conference on Computer
Communications , 2000.
[20] O. Ercetin, S. Krishnamurthy, Son Dao, and L. Tassiu-
las. A predictive QoS routing scheme for broadband
low earth orbit satellite networks. In IEEE International
Symposium on Personal Indoor and Mobile Radio Com-
munications , 2000.
[21] S.K. Fayaz, Y . Tobioka, V . Sekar, and M. Bailey. Bo-
hatei: Flexible and elastic DDoS defense. USENIX
Security Symposium , pages 817–832, 2015.
[22] Daniel Fischer, David Basin, Knut Eckstein, and
Thomas Engel. Predictable mobile routing for space-
craft networks. IEEE Transactions on Mobile Comput-
ing, 12(6):1174–1187, 2013.
[23] Daniel Fischer, David Basin, and Thomas Engel. Topol-
ogy dynamics and routing for predictable mobile net-
works. In IEEE International Conference on Network
Protocols , 2008.
[24] Y . Gilad, A. Herzberg, M. Sudkovitch, and M. Gober-
man. CDN-ondemand: An affordable DDoS defense
via untrusted clouds. Network and Distributed System
Security Symposium - NDSS , pages 1–15, 2016.
[25] Giacomo Giuliari, Tobias Klenze, Markus Legner,
David Basin, Adrian Perrig, and Ankit Singla. Inter-
net backbones in space. ACM SIGCOMM Computer
Communication Review , 50(1):25–37, 2020.
[26] Deli Gong, Muoi Tran, Shweta Shinde, Hao Jin, Vyas
Sekar, Prateek Saxena, and Min Suk Kang. Practical
veriﬁable in-network ﬁltering for DDoS defense. In
IEEE International Conference on Distributed Comput-
ing Systems , 2019.
[27] Vidyashankar V Gounder, Ravi Prakash, and Hosame
Abu-Amara. Routing in LEO-based satellite networks.
IEEE Emerging Technologies Symposium. Wireless
Communications and Systems , pages 22.1–22.6, 1999.
[28] Mark Handley. Delay is not an option. In ACM Work-
shop on Hot Topics in Networks - HotNets , 2018.[29] Mark Handley. Using ground relays for low-latency
wide-area routing in megaconstellations. In ACM Work-
shop on Hot Topics in Networks - HotNets , 2019.
[30] Todd Harrison, Katylin Johnson, and Thomas G.
Roberts. Space threat assessment 2018.
https://www.csis.org/analysis/space-threat-
assessment-2018 , 2018.
[31] Min Suk Kang, Soo Bum Lee, and V . D. Gligor. The
Crossﬁre attack. In IEEE Symposium on Security and
Privacy , 2013.
[32] T.S. Kelso. Validation of SGP4 and IS-GPS-200D
Against GPS Precision Ephemerides. AAS/AIAA Space
Flight Mechanics Conference , 2007.
[33] Tobias Klenze, Giacomo Giuliari, Christos Pappas,
Adrian Perrig, and David Basin. Networking in Heaven
as on Earth. In ACM Workshop on Hot Topics in Net-
works - HotNets , 2018.
[34] Bernhard Korte and Jens Vygen. Combinatorial Op-
timization: Theory and Algorithms . Springer-Verlag
Berlin Heidelberg, 2012.
[35] Kuiper Systems LLC. Application of Kuiper Sys-
tems LLC forAuthority to Launch and Operate a Non-
Geostationary Satellite Orbit System in Ka-band Fre-
quencies. https://licensing.fcc.gov/myibfs/
download.do?attachment_key=1773885 , 2019.
[36] Aleksandar Kuzmanovic and Edward W. Knightly. Low-
rate TCP-targeted denial of service attacks. In Confer-
ence on Applications, technologies, architectures, and
protocols for computer communications , 2003.
[37] Soo Bum Lee and Virgil D Gligor. FLoc: Dependable
link access for legitimate trafﬁc in ﬂooding attacks. In
IEEE International Conference on Distributed Comput-
ing Systems , pages 327–338, 2010.
[38] Soo Bum Lee, Min Suk Kang, and Virgil D Gligor.
CoDef: Collaborative defense against large-scale link-
ﬂooding attacks. In ACM International Conference on
emerging Networking EXperiments and Technologies -
CoNEXT , pages 417–428, 2013.
[39] X. Liu, X. Yang, and Y . Lu. To ﬁlter or to authorize:
Network-layer DoS defense against multimillion-node
botnets. ACM SIGCOMM Conference on Data Commu-
nication , pages 195–206, 2008.
[40] Xin Liu, Xiaowei Yang, and Yong Xia. NetFence:
preventing internet denial of service from inside out.
ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review ,
40(4):255–266, 2010.
USENIX Association 2021 USENIX Annual Technical Conference    329

===== PAGE 15 =====
[41] Z. Liu, H. Jiny, Y .-C. Hu, and M. Bailey. Middlepo-
lice: Toward enforcing destination-deﬁned policies in
the middle of the internet. ACM Conference on Com-
puter and Communications Security , 24-28-October-
2016:1268–1279, 2016.
[42] R. Mahajan, S.M. Bellovin, S. Floyd, J. Ioannidis,
V . Paxson, and S. Shenker. Controlling high bandwidth
aggregates in the network. Computer Communication
Review , 32(3):62–73, 2002.
[43] S. A. M. Makki, Niki Pissinou, and Philippe Daroux.
LEO satellite communication networks - a routing ap-
proach. Wireless Communications and Mobile Comput-
ing, 3(3):385–395, 2003.
[44] Roland Meier, Petar Tsankov, Vincent Lenders, Laurent
Vanbever, and Martin Vechev. Nethide: Secure and
practical network topology obfuscation. In USENIX
Security Symposium , pages 693–709, 2018.
[45] J. Mirkovic, G. Prier, and P. Reiher. Attacking DDoS
at the source. International Conference on Network
Protocols, ICNP , pages 312–321, 2002.
[46] Michael Mitzenmacher and Eli Upfal. Probability
and Computing: Randomization and Probabilistic Tech-
niques in Algorithms and Data Analysis . Cambridge
University Press, 2017.
[47] Mynaric. Flight terminals (space). https://mynaric.
com/products/space/ , 2020.
[48] W.D. Nordhaus and X. Chen. Global gridded geo-
graphically based economic (G-Econ) data set, version
4. https://sedac.ciesin.columbia.edu/data/
set/spatialecon-gecon-v4 , 2016.
[49] E.J. Ohlmeyer. Analysis of an ultra-tightly coupled
GPS/INS system in jamming. In IEEE/ION Position,
Location, And Navigation Symposium , 2006.
[50] James Pavur, Daniel Moser, Martin Strohmeier, Vincent
Lenders, and Ivan Martinovic. A tale of sea and sky
on the security of maritime VSAT communications. In
IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy , 2020.
[51] Radware. Radware’s DefensePro DDoS Pro-
tection. https://www.radware.com/products/
defensepro/ , 2020.
[52] Barath Raghavan and Alex C Snoeren. A system for
authenticated policy-compliant routing. ACM SIG-
COMM Computer Communication Review , 34(4):167–
178, 2004.
[53] M Rajanna, Shiva Murthy, and Kantharaju H C. Satel-
lite networks routing protocol issues and challenges: Asurvey. International Journal of Innovative Research
in Computer and Communication Engineering , 2:153,
2007.
[54] S. Ramanathan, J. Mirkovic, M. Yu, and Y . Zhang.
SENSS against volumetric DDoS attacks. Annual Com-
puter Security Applications Conference , pages 266–277,
2018.
[55] Ryan Rasti, Mukul Murthy, Nicholas Weaver, and Vern
Paxson. Temporal lensing and its application in puls-
ing denial-of-service attacks. In IEEE Symposium on
Security and Privacy , 2015.
[56] H. Rausch. Jamming commercial satellite communica-
tions during wartime an empirical study. In IEEE Inter-
national Workshop on Information Assurance , pages 8
pp.–118, 2006.
[57] Desmond Schmidt, Kenneth Radke, Seyit Camtepe,
Ernest Foo, and Michał Ren. A survey and analysis of
the GNSS spooﬁng threat and countermeasures. ACM
Computing Surveys , 48(4):1–31, 2016.
[58] Ankit Singla, Balakrishnan Chandrasekaran, P. Brighten
Godfrey, and Bruce Maggs. The internet at the speed
of light. In ACM Workshop on Hot Topics in Networks ,
HotNets, pages 1:1–1:7, 2014.
[59] SpaceNews. SpaceX adds laser crosslinks to polar
Starlink satellites. https://spacenews.com/spacex-
adds-laser-crosslinks-to-polar-starlink-
satellites/ , 2021.
[60] SpaceX. SpaceX Non-Geostationary Satellite
System. https://fcc.report/IBFS/SAT-LOA-
20161115-00118/1158350.pdf , 2016.
[61] SpaceX. SpaceX Non-Geostationary Satel-
lite System, modiﬁcation on satellite space sta-
tion ﬁling. https://fcc.report/IBFS/SAT-MOD-
20190830-00087/1877671 , 2019.
[62] SpaceX. Application for modiﬁcation of blanket earth
station authorization. https://fcc.report/IBFS/
SES-MOD-INTR2020-02035/2612707 , 2020.
[63] SpaceX. SpaceX Non-Geostationary Satellite
System, modiﬁcation on satellite space station
ﬁling. https://licensing.fcc.gov/myibfs/
download.do?attachment_key=2274316 , 2020.
[64] Ahren Studer and Adrian Perrig. The Coremelt attack.
InComputer Security – ESORICS , pages 37–52, 2009.
[65] Telesat. Telesat Lightspeed. https://www.telesat.
com/leo-satellites/ , 2021.
330    2021 USENIX Annual Technical Conference USENIX Association

===== PAGE 16 =====
[66] Thales. VasseLINK user manual. https:
//www.verasatglobal.com/wp-content/uploads/
2019/02/Thales-Vesselink-User-Manual.pdf ,
2020.
[67] Muhammad Usman, Marwa Qaraqe, Muham-
mad Rizwan Asghar, and Imran Shaﬁque Ansari.
Mitigating distributed denial of service attacks in
satellite networks. Transactions on Emerging
Telecommunications Technologies , 31(6), 2020.
[68] M. Werner. A dynamic routing concept for ATM-based
satellite personal communication networks. IEEE Jour-
nal on Selected Areas in Communications , 15(8):1636–
1648, 1997.
[69] Lloyd Wood. Internetworking with satellite constella-
tions . PhD thesis, University of Surrey, 2001.[70] Lloyd Wood. Satellite constellation networks. In In-
ternetworking and Computing Over Satellite Networks ,
pages 13–34. Springer, 2003.
[71] Yipeng Wu, Zhihua Yang, and Qinyu Zhang. A novel
DTN routing algorithm in the GEO-relaying satellite
network. In International Conference on Mobile Ad-hoc
and Sensor Networks , 2015.
[72] Abraham Yaar, Adrian Perrig, and Dawn Song. SIFF: A
stateless Internet ﬂow ﬁlter to mitigate DDoS ﬂooding
attacks. In IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy ,
pages 130–143, 2004.
[73] Yuan Yang, Mingwei Xu, Dan Wang, and Yu Wang.
Towards energy-efﬁcient routing in satellite networks.
IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications ,
34(12):3869–3886, 2016.
USENIX Association 2021 USENIX Annual Technical Conference    331