

===== PAGE 1 =====
27340 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 11, NO. 16, 15 AUGUST 2024
SatShield: In-Network Mitigation of Link Flooding
Attacks for LEO Constellation Networks
Wei Jiang , Hao Jiang ,Member, IEEE ,Y u l a iX i e ,Member, IEEE ,J i n gW u ,Member, IEEE ,
Xiaofan He ,Senior Member, IEEE , Hao Li, and Pan Zhou ,Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract —Low Earth orbit (LEO) satellite networks provide
global connectivity but are vulnerable to security threats, suchas link ﬂooding attacks (LFAs). To defend against such attacks,state-of-the-art approaches employ SDN to acquire a globalview of the network, enabling the detection and mitigation ofmalicious trafﬁc. However, in the LEO constellation networks,the distributed nature of satellites across a large spatial scaleintroduces signiﬁcant latency in both the satellite-to-groundand intersatellite links, with latency reaching up to tens ofmilliseconds, while attack trafﬁc dynamically adapts withinsubmilliseconds. As a result, the existing defense systems facechallenges in countering these attacks effectively due to the
increased reaction time caused by link latency. In this article,
we leverage programmable switches to build a real-time defensesystem against LFAs in the LEO constellation networks. Toachieve this, we analyse the practical constraints encounteredin the deployment of LFA attacks against the state-of-the-artLEO satellite systems. We observe that despite the ability ofbots to initiate attack trafﬁc from any location worldwide, ananomalous distribution of ﬂow rate on the affected links canstill be detected. We propose SatShield, an in-network defensesystem that ﬁlters out suspicious trafﬁc (heavy ﬂows) in thenetwork and mitigates these threats by leveraging programmablepacket scheduling. By using SatShield, we are able to achievereal-time identiﬁcation and rate-limiting of attacks at the linerate on a per-packet basis. We implement SatShield with P4 ina commercial programmable switch and evaluate it with real-world trafﬁc traces. Our evaluation shows that the SatShieldautonomously identiﬁes LFA attack ﬂows and rapidly mitigatesLFA attacks.
Index Terms —Low Earth orbit (LEO) network, link ﬂooding
attack (LFA), programmable switches, SDN.
I. I NTRODUCTION
RECENTLY, the advent of low Earth orbit (LEO) satellite
constellations has catalyzed the expansion of the Internet
into space, promising enhanced global connectivity character-ized by low-latency, high-bandwidth, and cost-effectiveness.
Among the key contenders in this emerging arena are SpaceX,
Manuscript received 11 January 2024; revised 29 March 2024 and 18 April
2024; accepted 3 May 2024. Date of publication 14 May 2024; date of currentversion 8 August 2024. This work was supported in part by the National KeyResearch and Development Program of China under Grant 2022YFB2901202.
(Corresponding author: Xiaofan He.)
Wei Jiang, Hao Jiang, Jing Wu, Xiaofan He, and Hao Li are with the
Electronic Information School, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, Hubei,China (e-mail: jiangxwei@whu.edu.cn; jh@whu.edu.cn; wujing@whu.edu.cn;
xiaofanhe@whu.edu.cn; eehaoli@whu.edu.cn).
Yulai Xie and Pan Zhou are with the School of Cyber Science and
Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan
430074, Hubei, China (e-mail: ylxie@hust.edu.cn; panzhou@hust.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/JIOT.2024.3397865Amazon, and Telesat [1]. Notably, SpaceX’s Starlink satellite
constellation has commenced its phased deployment, com-
prising thousands of LEO satellites. Since 2020, the Starlink
Internet service has been operational in selected regions [2].
This system exhibits the capability to deliver uninterrupted
services independent of ground network coverage, exempliﬁed
by its deployment in conﬂict zones, such as Ukraine [3]and
Gaza [4].
The security of LEO satellite constellation networks, similar
to that of critical ground-based communication infrastructurelike ISP and data center networks, is of paramount impor-
tance. LEO satellite constellation networks, as a distinctive
form of communication infrastructure, are more vulnerable
to attacks compared to the terrestrial networks. Due to their
global coverage, adversaries can launch attacks from any loca-tion worldwide. These attacks include frequency interference,
service-level denial of access, and ﬂooding attacks on inter-
satellite links (ISLs), which are the focus of this article.Traditional satellite attack methodologies, such as interference
with satellite radio frequencies [5]and denial of access attacks
[6], have been extensively studied over many years. The
industry now possesses defense strategies and methodologies
against these attacks [7]. However, there remains a lack
of corresponding solutions within the network communityfor emerging ﬂooding attacks targeting ISLs in the satellite
networks.
Several reasons make the detection and mitigation of satel-
lite link ﬂooding attack (LFA) a signiﬁcant challenge.
Indistinguishable Trafﬁc: Attackers generate a substantial
volume of seemingly normal low-speed trafﬁc, evading effec-
tive identiﬁcation by the feature-based trafﬁc analysis methods
[8],[9]or volumetric DDoS defense [10],[11] mechanisms
until the trafﬁc aggregates at the targeted link.
High Dynamism: The dynamic nature of satellite network
topology [12], ﬂuctuating at a second-level timescale, requires
attackers to adapt their attack strategies dynamically (e.g., bot
clusters and targeted links) to maintain attacks in the target
area, effectively circumventing the slower or ﬁxed defensivesystems.
Global Distribution: Target links may be distributed any-
where within the constellation network, potentially leaving theendpoint defense system unaware of an ongoing attack.
Control Channel Limitations: The constraints in control
channel bandwidth and latency pose challenges to the real-timemonitoring of satellite statuses and the updating of defense
strategies from ground control centers.
2327-4662 c/circlecopyrt2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Electronic Science and Tech of China. Downloaded on January 13,2026 at 06:00:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 2 =====
JIANG et al.: SatShield: IN-NETWORK MITIGATION OF LINK FLOODING ATTACKS 27341
To mitigate LFA, prevailing approaches entail the collection
of real-time network data from distributed switches [13] or
probe packets [8]and their analysis on the centralized servers.
This analysis aims to discern suspicious trafﬁc patterns,
enabling the customization of appropriate defense and miti-gation strategies. In theory, such a model can detect network
congestion and counteract attacks through the rerouting or
other trafﬁc engineering techniques. However, deploying thesesolutions within a satellite network presents considerable
challenges. For instance, with LinkScope [8], the constantly
changing end-to-end paths within the satellite networks hin-der the precise identiﬁcation of LFA occurrences and their
locations through the packet probing. The LFADefender [9]
involves deploying agents on switches to gather link status
information, and analysing the entire network’s link status
on a controller to monitor and defend against LFA attacks.Nevertheless, within the satellite networks, the signiﬁcant
asymmetry in control channel latency poses hurdles, making
it arduous for the controller to attain an accurate global viewof network status.
The emerging programmable data plane is increasingly
leveraged for the implementation of high-performance networkdefense systems [10],[14],[15]. These systems achieve ﬂex-
ible defense strategies by customizing the programmable
pipeline while maintaining high-performance, such as Tbps-level throughput and microsecond-level latency. Moreover,
an expanding body of research on software-deﬁned constel-
lation network architecture and deployment [16],[17],[18]
suggests a gradual evolution toward full-stack programmability
in designing and constructing constellation networks [19].
This trend toward full-stack programmability motivates the
deployment of the defense systems that utilize programmable
switch data planes within the constellation networks.
We present SatShield, a defense system tailored for miti-
gating LFA within the satellite networks, operating at the line
rate and based on a programmable data plane architecture.SatShield is based on a critical observation: due to the scale
limitation of bots, the trafﬁc rate distribution of attack ﬂows
signiﬁcantly differs from benign trafﬁc rates. Individual botstypically initiate attack trafﬁc of several Mb/s, whereas 99%
of benign trafﬁc rates fall below 400 Kb/s. A pivotal design
choice involves ofﬂoading the intensive ﬂow ﬁltering processto the data plane. This approach enables handling all packets at
line rate, avoiding the need to sample packets or to implement
heavy ﬂow detection on the controller.
We deploy SatShield on programmable switches (Intel
Toﬁno) and conduct an in-depth analysis of its resource
utilization. Subsequently, we evaluate SatShield‘s heavy ﬂowﬁltering performance across various metrics using multiple
traces containing diverse trafﬁc patterns. Our experiments
show that the SatShield‘s ﬂow detector is about 84% smaller in
average relative error (ARE) compared to its closest competi-
tor HashFlow [20], while achieving approximately a 4% higher
F1 score. Finally, we showcase SatShield‘s effective tradeoff
between responsiveness and defensive capabilities. It achieves
subsecond reaction times without compromising benigntrafﬁc.
We list our contributions as follows.1) We study LFA attacks in LEO networks and identify a
critical trafﬁc pattern that allows us to recognize LFAattack ﬂows within trafﬁc traversing satellite links.
2) We propose a lightweight top- kﬁlter based on
programmable switches, capable of continuously moni-toring malicious trafﬁc patterns with minimal resource
usage.
3) We design a queue-based trafﬁc policing scheme to
minimize the impact on benign trafﬁc.
4) We analyse the overhead of the proposed solution and
evaluate its performance in a testbed network using real-world trafﬁc traces.
The remainder of this article is organized as follows.
Section IIpresents the threat model and motivation. We inves-
tigate LFA attacks within the LEO network and ascertain that
ﬂow rates serve as a signiﬁcant distinguishing feature betweenthe benign and attack trafﬁc in Section III. Following the
guidelines proposed in Section IV, we present the architecture
of the SatShield, detailing the design and implementation ofits ﬂow detector and ﬂow scheduler within programmable
switches in Section V. A comprehensive experimental evalu-
ation of SatShield is in Section VI, and Section VIIdiscusses
the scalability and compatibility of SatShield. Finally, we
conclude this article in Section
VIII.
II. B ACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
A. Link Flooding Attack in LEO
As a high-value telecommunication infrastructure, a variety
of potential attack modes, such as eavesdropping [21], satellite
transponder stealing [22], jamming attacks [23],[24], and
denial of access attacks [25], have been considered in the
design and construction process of the satellite networks[26],[27],[28]. However, unlike traditional geosynchronous
orbit communication satellites that use bent-pipe forwarding
[29], the emerging LEO satellite constellation network utilizes
the digital relay forwarding through the free-space laser links
[30], which introduces a new attack surface: the ISL. Recent
studies have shown that adversaries can utilize the globalcoverage of the LEO satellite network to launch LFAs against
the ISL from multiple locations on Earth, and that such
an attack would deplete the bandwidth of the ISL [31].A
sustained LFA attack on a collection of time-varying links
connecting two geographic regions would have the potential
to completely block all communication between the regions.
In Fig. 1, the adversary aims to disrupt satellite communi-
cation from Bangkok to Mexico (indicated by the green path).
Initially, the attacker leverages publicly available satellite orbitinformation to obtain real-time knowledge of the network’s
topology [32],[33],[34]. As the satellite networks prefer
the shortest path to offer lower latency compared to the
terrestrial networks [35], the adversary can anticipate the
path from Bangkok to Mexico in real-time or in advance.Subsequently, the adversary ascertains the targeted links for
the attack (represented by the red ISL in the diagram) and all
viable attack paths (represented by the pink line) by takinginto consideration the geographical distribution of the bots
(depicted as red dots in the diagram) and the target paths.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Electronic Science and Tech of China. Downloaded on January 13,2026 at 06:00:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 3 =====
27342 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 11, NO. 16, 15 AUGUST 2024
Fig. 1. LFA in LEO constellation.
They can then schedule the bots to initiate attacking trafﬁc
and induce congestion on the targeted link.
Compared to traditional LFAs, such as coremelt [36],
crossﬁre [37], and attacks targeting SDN architectures
[38],[39],[40], LFAs targeting the LEO satellite networks
exhibit several notable features.
1) An adversary has full access to the network topology
due to the global exposure of the low-earth orbit satellite
network. This enables the adversary to recruit bots indiverse locations to generate attack trafﬁc.
2) The low-latency routing nature of the low-earth orbit
satellite networks leads to routing predictability.
3) The high dynamism of the satellite network topology,
changing within seconds, enables the attacker to swiftly
adapt their attack strategy.
4) The attacker’s meticulous selection of bots globally
complicates their detection.
B. Existing LFA Defenses and Limitations
Table Ihighlights the tradeoffs between performance and
scalability in today’s LFA defenses.
Most LFA defense systems [9],[13],[41],[42],[43],
[44] adopt a centralized approach, deploying the defense
mechanisms on the control plane and gathering networkstatistics from the data plane. These defenses receive trafﬁc
samples or statistics from the switches, conduct detection, and
classiﬁcation, and write mitigation rules back to the switches.
However, using the software-only solutions is not scalable.
First, there exists a tradeoff between scalability and accuracy.While requesting ﬁne-grained statistics can enhance defense
effectiveness, impractical scalability in real-world networks
arises from the potential for overwhelming the control planedue to the enormous volume of statistical information [45].Second, the loop-from data collection at switches to response
generation at the control plane and subsequent deployment
of defense strategies back at switches extends the system’sresponse latency. This latency renders the system unable to
promptly respond to rapidly changing attack trafﬁc within the
satellite networks.
The latest LFA defenses, based on the programmable data
plane technologies [10],[14],[15],[46], operate in an in-
network manner that achieves high throughput and rapidresponse as attack situations change. Unfortunately, these
efforts suffer from one or more key limitations in the satellite
network settings because of the high dynamicity of attacktrafﬁc.
Low-Accuracy Detection: Poseidon [10] adopts a similar
approach to the assumption in RADAR. It necessitates dedi-
cated monitoring infrastructure, akin to NetFlow, to aggregate
the packet-level data into the ﬂow-level records. However, thismethod faces limitations because packet sampling approaches
cannot offer detailed detection results, and conducting ofﬂine
analysis requires additional computational resources, leadingto signiﬁcant delays in detection.
Ineffective Mitigation: These systems [10],[46] demand
substantial data plane resources from switches to log ﬂowcharacteristics, rendering them impractical for satellite links
that manage millions of ﬂows. In the context of satellite
networks, which typically handle numerous legitimate ﬂows,employing the components from Poseidon and Jaqen may not
yield optimal performance. For instance, Poseidon’s method of
recording 65k legitimate ﬂows in a hash table is not scalableto hundreds of thousands of connections, given the limited on-
chip memory capacity of just a few megabytes. Furthermore,
simply blocking trafﬁc may cause packet loss for legitimate
ﬂows, resulting in a Denial of Service (DoS) for benign
trafﬁc.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Electronic Science and Tech of China. Downloaded on January 13,2026 at 06:00:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 4 =====
JIANG et al.: SatShield: IN-NETWORK MITIGATION OF LINK FLOODING ATTACKS 27343
TABLE I
COMPARISON OF LFA D EFENSE SOLUTIONS
C. Opportunities of Programmable LEO
Modern programmable switches have garnered attention
for their potential to enhance the performance and ﬂexibility
of DDoS defenses, as previously mentioned. We envision
programmable switches as pivotal components within LEOnetworks due to their ability to offer: 1) high line-rate
assurance, such as state-of-the-art programmable data planes
offering tens of Tbps of line-rate processing capacity, which
is attractive for countering large-scale attacks and 2) ﬂexi-
bility in supporting evolving attacks, whereas the traditionalspaceborne switching systems are either ﬁxed-function or have
limited programmability. With the help of new switch architec-
tures, we can ﬂexibly perform detection (e.g., capturing packetsignatures using programmable parsers) and mitigation (e.g.,
ﬁltering attack trafﬁc using customizable ﬂow tables).
For completeness, we provide a brief overview of the
programmable switch architecture illustrated in Fig. 2.T h e
programmable switch typically consists of several pro-
grammable blocks and many nonprogrammable components.Programmable blocks include a parser, multiple match-action
stages, and a deparser. Nonprogrammable components feature
the trafﬁc manager, packet replication engine, ingress/egressMAC, PCIe, and DMA Engines. Packets enter the switch
at an ingress MAC and are processed by a programmable
parser that converts the serialized packet header into well-structured packet header vectors (PHVs). These PHVs are
then processed by an ingress match-action pipeline, potentially
replicated by a packet replication engine, and stored in a
common packet queue. The PHVs are then retrieved from the
queue and passed through an egress match-action pipeline,possibly with additional packet header modiﬁcations, before
being transmitted.
III. D
ETECTION STRATEGY ANALYSIS
To effectively detect LFA attacks in LEO networks, we ﬁrst
explore the practical constraints imposed by the real satellite
systems, such as user bandwidth in the uplink and downlink,
as well as the number of users accessing a single satellite.
We observe that, despite the theoretically arbitrary complexity
of LFA attacks in the satellite networks, the actual attacktrafﬁc still exhibits distinct patterns. Speciﬁcally, attackers
can intricately design attack paths to minimize per-ﬂow rates
when using the ﬁve-tuple as ﬂow keys, a common methodin the existing monitoring systems and network applications.
However, when delineated by source or destination addresses
Fig. 2. Programmable switch architecture.
TABLE II
SATELLITE NETWORK PARAMETER
as ﬂow keys, these attack ﬂows’ aggregated rates signiﬁcantly
exceed those of benign trafﬁc.
To corroborate our observations, we conducted simulations
using a network topology based on Starlink Shell 1 [48].
Using a randomized selection of 20 city pairs, we measured
the ﬂow rate of attack ﬂows while varying the number ofbots, employing either source or destination addresses as
ﬂow keys. These simulations serve as the empirical evidence
supporting our observations and aid in establishing guidelines
for detecting LFA attacks in LEO networks.
A. Attack Flow Rates in Empty Network
As shown in Fig. 3, to ﬂood an ISL with a bandwidth of
20 Gb/s, approximately 313 source bots (53 destination bots)
are required to initiate attack trafﬁc using their maximum
upstream bandwidth. At this point, the rate of the attack
ﬂow, whether using source or destination addresses as ﬂowkeys (hereafter referred to as “attack ﬂow”), reaches 64 and
384 Mb/s, respectively. These values signiﬁcantly surpass the
typical rates of regular Internet ﬂows. As the number of botsincreases, the ﬂow rate of the attack ﬂow gradually diminishes.
However, unlike adversaries in ground networks who can
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Electronic Science and Tech of China. Downloaded on January 13,2026 at 06:00:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 5 =====
27344 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 11, NO. 16, 15 AUGUST 2024
Fig. 3. Attack ﬂow rate versus number of bots.
theoretically expand their botnet without limit, those targeting
satellite networks are constrained by the service capacity of
the network itself. For instance, while Starlink can presently
serve millions of user terminals, we assume the adversary
has access to 10 000 user terminals (approximately 1% ofthe overall users). From this point, we use the terms “bot”
and “user terminal” interchangeably. In such a scenario, the
average ﬂow rate of the attack ﬂow measures about 2.3 and13.8 Mb/s, respectively. Even these values still surpass the
observed 650 Kb/s, which represents the 99th percentile of
ﬂow rates (R
P99)in Internet ﬂows [49].
A more complex attack strategy involves the adversary
minimizing the per-ﬂow rate against the defense systems that
use the ﬁve-tuple as ﬂow keys. Speciﬁcally, the adversaryconstructs attack ﬂows between each source bot and multiple
destination bots, thereby signiﬁcantly reducing the per-ﬂow
rate. For instance, when the adversary controls 10 000 bots,this strategy results in ﬂow rates as low as tens of Kb/s.
However, when using source or destination addresses as
the ﬂow key, the aggregated ﬂow rates for each source or
destination bot remain consistent with rates observed with-
out employing this strategy. Moreover, this strategy notablyincreases ﬂow fan-out, a characteristic that can be employed
in detecting attack ﬂows [50].
B. Attack Flow Rates Amid Benign Trafﬁc
To verify whether the aforementioned distribution of attack
ﬂow rates can be utilized to detect attack trafﬁc amidst benign
background trafﬁc, we employ an evaluation-based approach.To emulate realistic trafﬁc patterns in the satellite networks, we
utilize the CAIDA19 trace [51], incorporating the Pop trafﬁc
distribution model.
The evaluation of these LFA attacks was conducted using
the state-of-the-art satellite network simulator, Icarus [31].
All our simulations were performed on a local workstation
equipped with two Intel XEON Gold 18-core CPU at 2.3 Ghz
and 256 GB RAM, running Ubuntu 20.04 with kernel version5.15. Table IIlists all the main parameters used in Icarus.
The maximum uplink rate per user, whether regular or bot,
is 64 Mb/s, while the downlink rate is 384 Mb/s [52]. Each
satellite can serve a maximum of 2080 users [53], and the ISL
Fig. 4. Attack ﬂow rate distribution in the presence of benign background
trafﬁc.
has a symmetric bandwidth of 20 Gb/s in both the directions
[54].
We simulate LFA attacks on satellite links on the Starlink
Shell 1 network topology, which consists of 1584 LEO
satellites equipped with ISL. We assume that bots and benign
user terminals can be distributed anywhere on the Earth’s
surface. We introduce benign trafﬁc among 1860 cities with a
population exceeding 300k [55]. We randomly sample ﬂows
from the CAIDA 19 data set and distribute them between
the cities proportionally to their population size. In total, we
sampled 75 million times, discarding any ﬂow that wouldresult in any link utilization exceeding 90% between the cities.
This trafﬁc accounted for 14% of the global uplink bandwidth.
Considering that the majority of the population resides on land,which covers 29% of the Earth’s surface, we believe that this
setting of benign trafﬁc accurately represents the bandwidth
usage in the satellite networks.
We conducted LFA experiments with a varying number of
bots aimed at disrupting connections between 20 randomly
selected pairs of cities. Fig. 4illustrates the distribution of
attack ﬂow rates on the victim links. The presence of benign
trafﬁc signiﬁcantly impacts the required attack ﬂow rates for
an LFA attack. However, even with 10 000 bots, the ﬂow
rate remains inadequate to reduce the attack ﬂow to a level
indistinguishable from benign trafﬁc.
Our observations conﬁrm a notable difference in the aggre-
gated ﬂow rates between attack ﬂow and benign trafﬁc when
utilizing source/destination addresses as ﬂow keys, regardlessof the benign trafﬁc presence. This disparity is a distinctive
characteristic that aids in detecting attack ﬂows within the
satellite network.
IV . D
ESIGN GUIDELINES
Our investigation ﬁndings in Section IIIhighlight the
presence of a distinct ﬂow pattern within victim links impactedby LFA attacks in the LEO network. Speciﬁcally, we observe
that the per source/destination aggregation ﬂow rate associated
with these malicious attack ﬂows surpasses the ﬂow rate ofbenign ﬂows. Leveraging this distinctive ﬂow characterization
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Electronic Science and Tech of China. Downloaded on January 13,2026 at 06:00:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 6 =====
JIANG et al.: SatShield: IN-NETWORK MITIGATION OF LINK FLOODING ATTACKS 27345
enables the effective identiﬁcation and detection of LFA-
attacking ﬂows within the LEO network.
A. Straw-Man Solution
To implement this strategy, a viable approach entails
the utilization of the sketch-based data structures [56] or
comparable techniques for efﬁcacious monitoring and analysisof high-volume ﬂows traversing the network links [57],[58].
Based on the observed ﬂow rates, these ﬂows are categorized
into benign trafﬁc and suspected attack ﬂows. Followingthe detection phase, a blocking mechanism is enacted to
halt suspected attack ﬂows promptly. By employing these
techniques, network administrators can proactively identifyand counter potential threats, thereby bolstering the network’s
overall security.
Limitations: However, there are several inherent limitations
that must be considered:
1) When employing sketch or its alternatives for monitor
ﬂows traversing victim links, the straw-man schemerequires substantial memory allocation to achieve an
acceptable monitoring result. This requirement arises
from the high inﬂux of ﬂows, reaching millions per
second, observed on these links. Deploying smaller
memory sizes would result in signiﬁcant hash collisions,rendering the obtained results statistically insigniﬁcant.
2) Besides, the inherent irreversibility of sketch or its
alternatives poses a limitation, as they can only inferthe presence of an attacking ﬂow without directly iden-
tifying speciﬁc attacking ﬂows amidst a multitude of
ﬂows. Existing reversible sketch methods [59], however,
attempt to overcome this limitation by introducing addi-
tional arrays to store ﬂow metadata and implementing
complex algorithms to correlate sketch counters withcorresponding ﬂow metadata. Although this provides a
means to identify speciﬁc attacking ﬂows, it signiﬁcantly
increases computational requirements and memory con-sumption during the attack detection.
3) Furthermore, employing a simplistic blocking mecha-
nism to defend against attacking ﬂows can inadvertently
cause harm to benign trafﬁc. This issue arises from the
statistical errors inherent in the sketch-based detectiontechniques and the reality that some benign ﬂows may
also exhibit high-volume characteristics.
4) Moreover, using sketch-based approaches necessitates,
including a controller to compute the rate of each ﬂow
and generate blocking rules. However, introducing such
a controller creates a signiﬁcant control loop delay,rendering it unsuitable for the satellite networks. In
these networks, the attack trafﬁc can rapidly ﬂuctuate
within subsecond intervals, affected by factors, suchas the movement of satellites, thereby leading to the
ineffectiveness of blocking rules.
B. Design Choices
The straw-man solution, however, is inadequate for effec-
tively countering LFA attacks in satellite networks due to its
limitations: high resource consumption, potential impact onbenign trafﬁc, and latency in defense strategy updates. To
address the above limitations, we make the following criticaldesign choices.
First, inspired by Hashpipe [60] and its variant [61], and
in alignment with limitations 1) and 2), we opt to track onlythe top- kheavy ﬂows instead of all ﬂow rates. Alongside
each ﬂow record, we monitor both the ﬂow rate and the
key, which includes the source/destination addresses. Thischoice signiﬁcantly reduces the memory requirements for
tracking and ﬁltering heavy ﬂows, overcoming the irreversible
constraints of the sketch. It is important to note that theHashpipe strategy of “always inserting ﬂow records in the
ﬁrst stage” can potentially lead to the fragmentation of ﬂow
records, resulting in their incorrect eviction from the hash
table. To signiﬁcantly enhance the detection precision, we
introduce auxiliary data structures and recirculation logic,which will be elaborated on in subsequent chapters for a
comprehensive understanding.
To address limitation 3), we employ a queue-based ﬂow
scheduling approach instead of simply blocking ﬂows. The
priority of ﬂows in the queues is determined based on their
rate, with the top- kﬂows assigned lower priority in the egress
queue. The design facilitates the forwarding of all trafﬁc under
normal, uncongested conditions. However, during instances
of link congestion, suspicious ﬂows are passively discarded,meaning they are automatically deprioritized and eventually
dropped if congestion persists. This design enables the defense
system to operate continuously, prioritizing the forwarding ofbenign trafﬁc regardless of whether an attack is ongoing.
Another design choice we made is to implement an entirely
localized detection and mitigation solution within the satellite,
also known as in-network mitigation. To achieve this, we
incorporated a simple queue conﬁguration agent within thesatellite, eliminating the need for external controllers and
reducing the response latency of the control loop. By directly
ﬁltering the top- kheavy ﬂows in the data plane, there is no
need for complex calculation processes like sketch schemes.
This approach also allows for easy updates to defense rules
by mapping the top- kheavy ﬂows to queue priorities, thereby
eliminating reliance on central controllers.
V. S
ATSHIELD
Following the guidelines in Section IV, we propose a
novel in-network LFA mitigation solution called SatShield,
speciﬁcally designed for LEO networks. Fig. 5illustrates the
two main components of SatShield: 1) the ﬂow detector
and 2) ﬂow scheduler. The ﬂow detector within SatShieldefﬁciently identiﬁes and ﬁlters the top- kheavy ﬂows directly
on the data plane. Subsequently, the ﬂow scheduler employs a
lightweight queue scheduling the algorithm to selectively andpassively discard packets of suspicious trafﬁc, thus mitigating
LFA attacks.
A. Flow Detector
In this section, we delve into the intricate details of the
ﬂow detector component within SatShield, elaborating on its
data structures and the underlying algorithms. We demonstrate
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Electronic Science and Tech of China. Downloaded on January 13,2026 at 06:00:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 7 =====
27346 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 11, NO. 16, 15 AUGUST 2024
Fig. 5. SatShield architecture.
the workﬂow of SatShield through detailed case studies.
Additionally, an analysis of the utilization of the top- kﬁlter
is performed.
1) Data Structure of Flow Detector: As depicted in Fig. 5,
the data structure of SatShield comprises a top- kﬁlter and its
auxiliary sketch. The top- kﬁlter consists of dstages of hash
tables, denoted as T1,T2,..., Td, where dis typically set to 8.
Each table, i.e., T1,T2,..., Td,contains mbuckets for storing
ﬂow records, with each record following the format (key,cnt).
The keyﬁeld stores the ID of the ﬂow, speciﬁcally the source
or destination address, while the cntﬁeld records the volume
of bytes for the corresponding ﬂow. Additionally, each table
is equipped with an independent hash function and multiple
ALU units. The hash function is responsible for mapping theﬂow ID to a speciﬁc bucket within table T
i, while the ALU
units handle the required bucket updates, including ﬂow record
insertion and replacement. Notably, during the bucket updates,the ALU units also update the ﬁelds in the corresponding
PHV containers. The details of this process will be further
elaborated on through the algorithm presented later.
Inspired by the MV-Sketch [62], the auxiliary table in
SatShield is composed of wbuckets. Each bucket within the
sketch comprises three ﬁelds: 1) M
key, which stores the ID of
the major ﬂow among all ﬂows mapped to the bucket; 2) Rcnt,a
distinct counter that sums the byte volume of all ﬂows hashed
to the bucket; and 3) Vcnt, an indicator counter that determines
whether the major ﬂow should be retained or replaced, similar
to the concept presented in MJRTY [63]. Similar to the top- k
ﬁlter, the auxiliary table is associated with an independent hash
function and multiple ALU units, facilitating the mapping of
ﬂows to buckets and the subsequent updates of the buckets.
In the ﬂow detector, we use a multihashing method to decide
where to store a ﬂow record across the d+1 tables. This design
enables the pipelining of memory accesses to the d+1 tables
across d+1 independent stages, allowing different packets
to access different stages simultaneously. Moreover, the spaceused in the ﬂow detector is ﬁxed and can be preallocated,
ensuring each bucket is occupied by exactly one ﬂow record.
If a collision occurs, the ﬂow detector employs a specially
designed collision resolution scheme to determine which ﬂowrecord should be retained and which should be evicted to the
auxiliary table or discarded.
2) Algorithm of Flow Detector: When a packet pfrom ﬂow
farrives, a new PHV container, also known as metadata, is
added to the packet. The source/destination address and packet
size from the packet header are used to initialize the keyand
cntﬁelds within the PHV container, respectively. The W
min
ﬁeld is initialized to 0. To track the kmost heavy ﬂows, all
buckets are initially empty, meaning keys and counters are set
to zero. Subsequently, the top- kﬁlter and auxiliary table are
updated according to the algorithm presented in Algorithm 1.
Top-k Filter: First, in T1, we map the PHV container to a
bucket at index idx=h1(key)(line 3). If T1[idx]i se m p t y ,
we can simply initialize the bucket with keyandcnt(lines 4
and 5). If the bucket already contains a record with the same
keyas the PHV container, we increment the fcntﬁeld in the
bucket by cnt(lines 7 and 8). In either case, the packet pis
allocated a proper bucket, and we clear the PHV container to
complete its processing in the ﬂow detector.
In the case of a collision, we check if fcntis less than cnt
(line 11). If fcntis smaller, we replace the existing ﬂow record
in the bucket with the new keyand cnt(lines 12 and 13).
The displaced record from the bucket is then stored in the
PHV container. If fcntis greater than or equal to cnt, the PHV
container is forwarded to the next stage. We repeat the same
process sequentially in T2,..., Td.
Auxiliary Table: A PHV container centers this table if a
bucket to record the PHV container is not found in the top- k
ﬁlter or if a ﬂow record from the top- kﬁlter is replaced and
stored in the PHV container. Subsequently, PHV containercenters the auxiliary table for further processing. In this
table, the keyfrom PHV container cis mapped to bucket
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Electronic Science and Tech of China. Downloaded on January 13,2026 at 06:00:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 8 =====
JIANG et al.: SatShield: IN-NETWORK MITIGATION OF LINK FLOODING ATTACKS 27347
Algorithm 1 Flow Detector
Require: packet p
1:C.key←p.srcaddr ,C.cnt←p.pktsize ,C.Wmin←0
Top-kﬁlter:
2:fori==1t o ddo
3: idx←hi(C.key)
4: ifTi[idx]== NULL then
5: Ti[idx]←C
6: return
7: else if Ti[idx].key==C.keythen
8: Ti[idx].cnt←Ti[idx].cnt+C.cnt
9: return
10: else
11: ifTi[idx].cnt<C.Wminthen
12: // Swap out the ﬂow record in Ti[idx]
13: tmp key←C.key,tmp cnt←C.cnt
C.key←Ti[idx].key,C.cnt←Ti[idx].cnt
C.Wmin←Ti[idx].cnt
Ti[idx].key←tmp key,Ti[idx].cnt←tmp cnt
14: end if
15: end if
16:end for
Auxiliary table:
17:idx←ha(C.key)
18:ifTa[idx]== NULL then
19: Ta[idx].Mkey←C.key,
Ta[idx].Rcnt←C.cnt,
Ta[idx].Vcnt←C.cnt
20:else if Ta[idx].key==C.keythen
21: Ta[idx].Rcnt←Ta[idx].Rcnt+C.cnt,
Ta[idx].Vcnt←Ta[idx].Vcnt+C.cnt
22: ifTa[idx].Rcnt>C.Wminthen
23: //recirculated ﬂow record
24: C.key←Ta[idx].key,
C.cnt←Ta[idx].Rcnt,
C.Wmin←0
25: Goto Top- kﬁlter:
26: end if
27:else
28: Ta[idx].Vcnt←Ta[idx].Vcnt−C.cnt
29: ifTa[idx].Vcnt<0then
30: Ta[idx].Mkey←C.key,
Ta[idx].Rcnt←C.cnt,
Ta[idx].Vcnt←C.cnt
31: end if
32:end if
33:return
TA[idx], where idx=hA(key). Similarly, if TA[idx]i se m p t y ,
PHV container cis stored in this bucket (lines 18-19). When
a collision occurs (i.e., the c.keydiffer from the bucket’s
Mkey), we apply an MJRTY algorithm-inspired approach. We
decrement Vcntbyc.cnt.I fVcntdrops below zero, we replace
Mkeywith c.keyand reset VcntandRcnttoc.cnt(lines 28–30).
Otherwise, the Mkeyis the same as c.key, so we update the
bucket by adding c.cntto its Rcntand Vcnt(line 21). If the
updated Rcntexceeds c.Wmin, tracked in the top- kﬁlter, the
ﬂow record in the bucket is recirculated back to the top- kﬁlter
(lines 22–25), enabling its promotion based on the larger Rcnt.Notably, recirculating ﬂow records from bucket TA[idx]t ot h e
top-kﬁlter requires emptying the bucket TA[idx]. This enables
the immediate insertion of another PHV container, with a
different key, into the now-empty bucket TA[idx]. Additionally,
this reduction in counting errors enhances the accuracy of theMJRTY process.
Heavy Flow Detection: To detect heavy ﬂows, the agent in
the satellite switch checks every bucket in tables T
i(1≤i≤d)
at the end of an epoch. For each bucket B(i,j)(1≤i≤d
and 1 ≤j≤m),i fB(i,j).cnt≥τ, where τis preselected
based on the ﬂow rate distribution, B(i,j).keyis reported as a
heavy ﬂow. It is important to note that the SatShield requires
no cooperation from a central controller for the ﬂow record
collection. However, ﬂow records must be exported to the
agent at the end of each epoch, enabling SatShield to refresh
the top- kﬁlter and auxiliary table with the new ﬂow records.
3) Example Illustration: Fig. 6illustrates an example of
processing packets using SatShield‘s ﬂow detector. A packet
P1w i t hak e y Kenters the switch pipeline (a). The packet is
then hashed into a bucket containing a ﬂow record (C, 66).
Given that the count of the ﬂow record (C, 66) in stage 1 islarger, it is retained, and as a consequence, the W
minof packet
P1is updated to 66, reﬂecting the minimum watched ﬂow
record for P1(b). Since, the count for Kis larger than that
forE,Kis written to the table in stage 2, and the packet is
subsequently processed with E(c). In the subsequent stages,
Eencounters the inability to locate an empty bucket or a
bucket with a lower count. As a result, it proceeds to enter
the auxiliary table, also known as stage d+1. However, upon
encountering a collision in the auxiliary table (stage d+1),E
competes with the ﬂow record (Q,8,8)through the MJRTY
process. Emerging as the major ﬂow, Ethen replaces the
existing record with (E,23,23)(d).
When a packet with a key Rarrives, it fails to ﬁnd a suitable
bucket across all tables in stages 1 to d. As a result, it is directed
to the auxiliary table along with the updated value of Wmin
(e). Then, the cntﬁeld is incremented by 6, because the key
ﬁeld of the bucket matches R, the same as the arriving packet
p2.N o w ,t h e cntvalue (i.e., 119) is larger than that of Wmin
(i.e., 25). Therefore, Ris recirculated to the top- kﬁlter (f).
4) Analysis of Flow Record Utilization in Top-k Filter: We
propose a probabilistic framework that models the utilization
of the ﬂow record in the top- kﬁlter. Our analysis assumes that
Fdistinct ﬂows are fed into the ﬂow detector, which has d∗m
buckets and uses dpipeline stages.
First, consider stage 1, after inserting f1=Fﬂows randomly
intombuckets, the probability that a given bucket is empty is
p1=/parenleftbigg
1−1
m/parenrightbiggf1
≈e−f1
m.
The utilization of stage 1 is u1=1−p1. According to
Algorithm 1, since each bucket can contain only one ﬂow
record, the number of ﬂows not accommodated in stage 1 is
F−m×(1−p1).
Now, extending the analysis to stage iwhere 2 ≤i≤d,w e
assume fiﬂows are fed into stage iwith mbuckets, yielding
pi=/parenleftbigg
1−1
m/parenrightbiggfi
≈e−fi
m.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Electronic Science and Tech of China. Downloaded on January 13,2026 at 06:00:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 9 =====
27348 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 11, NO. 16, 15 AUGUST 2024
Fig. 6. Illustration of ﬂow detector. (a) Initial state of ﬂow detector. (b) Cin stage 1 being larger is retained in table. (c) Kbeing larger evicts Ein stage 2.
(d)Eis major ﬂow evicts Qin auxiliary table. (e) Rpass through top kﬁlter with watch min value 25. (f) Rrecirculated to top kﬁlter.
The number of ﬂows left for the next stage is
fi+1=fi−m×(1−pi).
Given any d,m, and G, we can recursively compute the
utilization of the top- kﬁlter as follows:
U=/summationtextd
i=1(m×(1−pi))
/summationtextd
i=1m.
B. Mitigation With Flow Scheduler
Building upon the discussion of the ﬂow detector, this
section introduces the ﬂow scheduler within SatShield. It pas-
sively discards anomalous ﬂows identiﬁed by the ﬂow detector
through the programmable ﬂow scheduling. Programming ascheduler involves deﬁning a speciﬁc order for packet drainage
from a given queue [47]. To achieve this, each packet is
assigned a rank that signiﬁes its priority in the drainageprocess. The programmable scheduler then processes these
ranks, dequeuing packets to adhere to the speciﬁed order.
As described in Section III, an algorithm designed to
mitigate LFA attacks should assign a lower priority to higher
ﬂow rates. With this criterion in mind, a simple yet efﬁ-
cient algorithm can be proposed: rank(p)=ﬂowrate (f
i).
The implementation of this ranking algorithm’s input–output
functionality can be easily achieved using readily available
data-plane resources. Indeed, ﬂow rates can be derived fromthe top- kﬁlter, and ranks can be conveniently attached to the
packets using the PHV containers [64].
A crucial consideration is how to implement the ranking
algorithm on limited resources in the onboard programmable
switches. Despite the simplicity of the ranking algorithm itself,
directly implementing it on the data plane poses challenges
for several reasons. First, the resources required by the
algorithm need to be shared with the ﬂow detector, whichdemands substantial resources (e.g., nine stages and approxi-
mately 50k SRAM per stage). Second, the ﬂow detector and
ﬂow scheduler require sequential packet operations since theﬂow scheduler relies on the results from the ﬂow detector.
Consequently, parallel resource optimization techniques arenot viable in this context. Third, the existing data plane
programming languages lack abstractions for programmable
schedulers [64]. Implementing the scheduling logic necessi-
tates a signiﬁcant amount of SRAM and stage resources.
Thus, we opt to utilize the existing priority queue in the
data plane and delegate the ranking computation of ﬂowsto the onboard control plane. Speciﬁcally, the control plane
periodically, known as an epoch, retrieves the key of heavy
ﬂows from the data plane’s top- kﬁlter. After determining if a
ﬂow is suspicious, it maps these ﬂows to the priority queue in
the data plane. Subsequent packets are then scheduled based
on this priority mapping. This design ensures the line-rate
processing of data packets while also providing the conve-
nience of implementing more advanced ranking algorithms inthe control plane without impacting the data plane.
C. SatShield Implementation
We implement SatShield in P4
16on Intel Toﬁno Wedge
100BF32X [65], with P4 Studio SDE 9.5. Our prototype
utilizes 11 stages and supports recording up to 10k heavy ﬂow.At a high level, SatShield uses a match-action stage in the
switch pipeline for each hash table. Every stage uses its own
SRAM, hash algorithm, and ALUs for the hash table. TheSRAM maintains the ﬂow record, with the ﬂow key utilized
by the hash unit for indexing ﬂow records within the SRAM.
Additionally, the ALU is responsible for the update logic. Foreach incoming packet, SatShield updates its ﬂow record and
enqueues the packet with the queue priority conﬁgured by
the control plane agent. The following paragraphs present theimplementation of several key modules in the system.
SRAM for Flow Record: In the Toﬁno chip’s TNA pro-
gramming model [66], SRAM in each stage is abstracted as
registers. The top- kﬁlter utilizes two registers to track the
ﬂow key and ﬂow rate individually, while the auxiliary tableadds registers to track the vote count of the major ﬂow during
the MJRTY process. Registers are accessed via stateful ALU,
which can read a speciﬁed element of the SRAM, execute theRegisterAction code, and write back the modiﬁed value to the
same element.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Electronic Science and Tech of China. Downloaded on January 13,2026 at 06:00:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 10 =====
JIANG et al.: SatShield: IN-NETWORK MITIGATION OF LINK FLOODING ATTACKS 27349
Hash for Index: We employ the user-deﬁned hash algo-
rithms in the TNA model to hash the ﬂow key to the bucketindex. The hash functions we utilized follow the format
(base+(h/max)), where the base represents the minimum
returned hash value, and max is the divisor in the modulooperation. In addition, we individually select the initandcoeff
values for the hash algorithm in each stage to ensure the
independence of the hash functions.
PHV Container for Flow Record Conveying: Due to the
inability to directly transmit values between the stages, the
packet key, byte size, and register values are stored in the PHVcontainer. This approach facilitates the data transfer across
stages. Flow records are transferred between the stages of the
top-kﬁlter and to the auxiliary table using the PHV containers.
Additionally, the PHV container tracks the minimum ﬂow rate
count observed by each packet.
Recirculation for Flow Record Promoting: Promoting ﬂow
records from the auxiliary table to the top- kﬁlter necessitates
reaccessing the top- kﬁlter. However, as backtracking is not
permitted in the pipeline, the PHV container with ﬂow records
cannot reaccess the top- kﬁlter. To address this challenge, we
leverage the recirculate() primitive in the TNA model. Thisinvolves encapsulating the ﬂow records into the packet and
routing it back to the ingress of the pipeline. The recirculated
packet then undergoes standard packet processing to update thetop-kﬁlter. It is important to note that enabling the recirculate()
operation requires conﬁguring a switch port in the loopback
mode, consuming switch backplane bandwidth. In Section VI,
we demonstrate that the recirculate() operation affects only a
negligible portion of ﬂows, thus ensuring the system’s line rate
operation.
VI. P
ERFORMANCE EVA L UAT I O N
We have evaluated SatShield to answer three research
questions as follows.
1) How much overhead does SatShield incur?2) How accurate is the ﬂow detector?
3) How effectively can SatShield defend against LFA
attacks?
A. Testbed Setup
Unlike most link ﬂood defense research [9],[14] that uses
behavioral simulation [67] for proof-of-concept, this study
uses a real testbed to conduct experiments and evaluations of
SatShield. The testbed includes a 3.2 Tbps Barefoot Toﬁno
switch, a Dell server equipped with an Intel Xeon E2620 v4,64 GB RAM, and a 10 Gb/s Intel network interface card,
and an Ixia XGS2 [68] trafﬁc generator equipped with a
100 GE load module. The switch and the trafﬁc generator are
connected through a 100 G optical ﬁber link, and the switch
and the server are connected through a four-point splitter (theswitch port is conﬁgured for 40 Gb/s). In this testbed, the
Toﬁno switch serves as the device under test (DUT). Both
SatShield and the reference P4 program are deployed. Utilizingthe trafﬁc generator’s 100 Gb/s load module, we generated
and recycled trafﬁc to evaluate throughput and latency. At theTABLE III
RESOURCE UTILIZATION ON WEDGE 100BF32X S WITCH
Fig. 7. SatShield incurs extra latency over a hundred nanoseconds, and itachieves line-rate processing. (a) Latency. (b) Throughput.
same time, the detection accuracy of the trafﬁc detector was
evaluated by replaying the CAIDA trafﬁc trace data.
To evaluate the defense effectiveness of SatShield against
LFA in the satellite networks, this study adopts bot distribu-tion, trafﬁc rate, and attack target/connection data with both
the empty network and Pop trafﬁc distribution model, based
on the results presented in Section III. The distribution of bots
is emulated using multiple Docker containers with distinct IP
addresses, while the emulation of attack trafﬁc is achieved
by generating TCP/UDP ﬂows at a speciﬁed rate betweenthe source bots and target bots by iperf3. Benign trafﬁc is
generated by replaying trafﬁc traces from the CAIDA data set.
B. Dataplane Overhead and Performance
In our initial set of experiments, we assessed the overhead
of SatShield. All measurements were performed on a Barefoot
Toﬁno switch using the P4 implementation of SatShield.
Resource Utilization: Table IIIdisplays the utilization of
hardware resources for each component of the P4 program.
Notably, the ﬂow detector exhibits the highest resource uti-lization due to its complexity. Overall, the P4 program utilizes
6.11% SRAM, 3.50% very long instruction words (VLIWs),
5.82% ALUs for ﬂow records update, and 12.5% of thehash units. These resources are distributed across 12 hardware
stages. It is worth mentioning that newer switch ASICs, such
as Toﬁno 3, offer increased resource provisions for all resourcetypes. Importantly, tracking the top 10K heavy ﬂows only
consumed 6.11% of resources, which indicates that tracking
even more heavy ﬂows, such as the top 20k or 50k, is feasibleon programmable switches.
Latency: We evaluated the additional latency incurred by
SatShield by comparing it to a baseline switch program called
“P4Hello” [68], which only forwards packets without extra
processing. As Fig. 7(a) shows, the SatShield data plane expe-
riences an additional latency of 1.45 microseconds compared
to the baseline. Interestingly, our observations indicate that
the scheduler component contributes only a small fraction ofthe overall overhead. This is because the scheduler module
only requires PHV container manipulation to assign ranks,
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Electronic Science and Tech of China. Downloaded on January 13,2026 at 06:00:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 11 =====
27350 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 11, NO. 16, 15 AUGUST 2024
Fig. 8. Recirculate ratio versus trafﬁc skewness.
whereas the detector module performs serial operations on
SRAM across multiple stages. It is important to note that our
tests were conducted without any background trafﬁc, meaning
that the latency of the scheduler module does not include
potential queueing delays. Queueing delays are inﬂuenced bybackground trafﬁc and the relative priority of packets com-
pared to the background ﬂow. Therefore, in this discussion, we
focus solely on the latency caused by the pipeline processing.
Throughput: In this evaluation, we continued to use the
P4Hello program as our baseline. As depicted in Fig. 7(b),
both SatShield and the baseline achieved similar throughputs,approximately 99.48 Gb/s. This similarity can be attributed
to the inherent pipelined nature of switch hardware, which
effectively absorbs small increases in latency through extensiveparallelism.
Recirculate Ratio: To assess the recirculate ratio of
SatShield, we compared it with the Hashﬂow [20]. Notably,
Hashﬂow also utilizes the “recirculate()” primitive for the
ﬂow statistics. We generated 100K ﬂows using the Ixia
XGS2, with the ﬂow rate following a Zipf distribution. As
depicted in Fig. 8, the recirculation ratio in this experiment
is approximately 1 ×10
−3, slightly higher than that of
Hashﬂow. This can be attributed to the utilization of the
MJRTY process in our approach, which enhances the accuracy
of ﬂow record estimation in the auxiliary table. In contrast,Hashﬂow’s approach of replacing ﬂow records upon hash
collisions leads to an underestimation of ﬂow counts, resulting
in a comparatively lower recirculation ratio.
C. Flow Detector Accuracy
Methodology: We replay CAIDA’s anonymized Internet
traces [51] using the Ixia XGS2, encompassing traces from
2008, 2012, 2016, and 2019. The 2008, 2012, and 2016
traces were collected in Chicago, whereas the 2019 trace was
collected in New York. Signiﬁcantly varying trafﬁc patterns
were observed across these distinct traces. The paper [49]
provides a comprehensive analysis of various dimensions, suchas ﬂow rates, ﬂow sizes, and ﬂow durations characterizing
these traces.
We utilize the source address as the ﬂow key (32-bit) and
evaluate SatShield‘s performance in detecting the top- kheavy
ﬂows. This evaluation includes a comparative analysis againstthe state-of-the-art solutions, such as HashPipe [60], HashFlow
[20], and Precision [69].
Metrics: Given a packet sequence, a target set Fis deﬁned
as the top- kheavy ﬂows. The evaluated algorithm produces an
estimated set ˆF. For a speciﬁc ﬂow f,R[f] and ˆR[f] denote its
rates in sets FandˆF, respectively. Additionally, |F|represents
the number of ﬂows within the set F. ARE and F1 score to
evaluate the performance of the algorithms.
The ARE is deﬁned as follows:
ARE=1
|F|/summationdisplay
f∈F/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleR[f]−ˆR[f]
R[f]/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle.
The F1 score is deﬁned as
F1 Score =2·Precision ·Recall
Precision +Recall.
Here, Precision represents the ratio of correctly identiﬁed top-
kﬂows to all reported ﬂows, while recall represents the ratio
of correctly identiﬁed top- kﬂows to all actual top- kﬂows
Precision =|F&ˆF|
|ˆF|,Recall =|F&ˆF|
|F|.
Results: In this experiment, we conducted packet replays
from each of the traces to evaluate the performance of
SatShield, HashFlow, HashPipe, and Precision in capturing the
top 104heavy ﬂows. The volume of replayed packets ranged
from 5 ×105to 5×106. As depicted in Fig. 9, SatShield
exhibits an approximately 84% smaller ARE compared to
its closest competitor HashFlow, alongside a roughly 4%higher F1 score. This discrepancy is attributed to SatShield‘s
utilization of the MJRTY process, enabling more precise
ﬂow rate estimation compared to HashFlow, which directly
erases information from buckets upon conﬂicts. Notably, as
the number of replayed packets increases, the performanceof SatShield and HashFlow remains relatively stable, while
that of other algorithms consistently degrades. This trend
arises from the behavior of Precision and HashPipe, whereinformation from past packets of ﬂows without a hash table
record fails to accumulate during packet processing. This
omission leads to underestimated ﬂow rates, potentially caus-ing heavy ﬂows to be erroneously replaced by lighter ones.
Furthermore, we observed variations in SatShield‘s
performance across different traces, attributable to discrepan-cies in their trafﬁc patterns. We noticed an increasing skewness
in the ﬂow rate distribution within these traces over the year
[49]. This escalating skewness in ﬂow distribution contributes
positively to the likelihood of heavy ﬂows transitioning into
major ﬂows within the MJRTY process, thereby augmenting
the algorithm’s overall performance.
D. Defense Effectiveness
We compare SatShield to ACC-Turbo [47] and Jaqen
[46], the state-of-the-art programmable dataplane-based DDoS
defense. ACC-Turbo employs the online clustering techniques
to identify potentially unknown attack pulses and prioritizestrafﬁc based on its level of maliciousness. On the other hand,
Jaqen utilizes sketch-based signatures for attack detection and
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Electronic Science and Tech of China. Downloaded on January 13,2026 at 06:00:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 12 =====
JIANG et al.: SatShield: IN-NETWORK MITIGATION OF LINK FLOODING ATTACKS 27351
Fig. 9. ARE and F1. (a) ARE CAIDA08. (b) ARE CAIDA12. (c) ARE CAIDA16. (d) ARE CAIDA19. (e) F1 CAIDA08. (f) F1 CAIDA12. (g) F1 CAIDA16.
(h) F1 CAIDA19.
Fig. 10. Reaction time and throughput measured with stable attack trafﬁc. (a) No defense. (b) Jaqen. (c) ACC-Turbo. (d) SatShield.
Fig. 11. Reaction time and throughput measured with dynamically changing attack trafﬁc. (a) No defense. (b) Jaqen. (c) ACC-Turbo. (d) SatShield.
implements rate-limiting or dropping mechanisms to mitigate
identiﬁed threats. We use the same setup as in the previous
experiments, with only one modiﬁcation: adopt the destination
address as the ﬂow key, a choice informed by observationsdiscussed in Section III.
Reaction Time and Throughput: We evaluate the reaction
time and throughput drops of SatShield, ACC-Turbo, andJaqen. Reaction time is deﬁned as the duration from the
moment these systems receive the ﬁrst attack packet to when
they commence mitigation. Throughput drops are deﬁned asthe extent of decrease in benign trafﬁc throughput, comparing
the throughput before and after the attack initiation. Weutilized Ixia to replay the CAIDA 19 trace for background
trafﬁc at 15 Gb/s.
1We generated UDP attack trafﬁc at 20 Gb/s
among an emulated set of 104bots.
In Fig. 10, the reaction times of both SatShield and ACC-
Turbo are approximately 1 s. Both the systems utilize the data
plane to identify highly suspicious ﬂows, while the control
plane manages the updating of ﬂow priorities. The data planeprocessing delay remains minimal, with the predominant time
1The CAIDA trace throughput being approximately 5 Gb/s, we concur-
rently replayed traces from three time periods—March 15th, June 21st, andSeptember 21st—at a rate of 5 Gb/s each, resulting in a combined benign
background trafﬁc of 15 Gb/s.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Electronic Science and Tech of China. Downloaded on January 13,2026 at 06:00:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 13 =====
27352 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 11, NO. 16, 15 AUGUST 2024
attributed to the control plane’s periodic retrieval of data plane
statistics and the conﬁguration of data plane queue priorities.Conversely, as depicted in Fig. 10(b), Jaqen’s reaction time
is about 10 s. This represents a tenfold increase in reaction
time compared to SatShield. This delay primarily results fromJaqen’s requirement for detecting attack trafﬁc features that
surpass a threshold in two consecutive time windows before
conﬁrming an attack and implementing the correspondingpacket-dropping strategy.
Regarding throughput drop, Jaqen exhibits the best
performance, whereas FIFO, without employing any defensemechanism, performs the worst. SatShield outperforms ACC-
Turbo due to the top- kﬁlter, providing more precise
identiﬁcation of suspicious ﬂows compared to online clus-
tering. Meanwhile, Jaqen employs sketches to achieve more
comprehensive and accurate estimations of ﬂow rates at theexpense of longer reaction times and increased resource
consumption.
Our experiments did not account for the latency associated
with the satellite control channel. However, accounting for
this latency would highlight the onboard control plane design
advantages of SatShield. In summary, SatShield strikes a betterbalance between the reaction speed and throughput drop than
the existing solutions.
Mitigating Adaptive Attacks: The subsequent experiments
evaluate how effectively our design can handle adaptive attack
ﬂows within an LEO network. To emulate satellite network
trafﬁc as realistically as possible, we constructed attack trafﬁcusing the data (bot distribution and attack ﬂow rates) from
the target links between Bangkok and Mexico City in an
empty network, as discussed in Section III. Unlike the previous
experiment, where benign trafﬁc was generated using a trafﬁc
generator, we employed iperf3 and Docker to emulate thebenign users, generating benign TCP ﬂows closely resembling
the ﬂow rates and durations found in the CAIDA data set.
We dynamically maintained the benign trafﬁc at approximately15 Gb/s.
Fig. 11displays the benign trafﬁc throughput during the
attack scenario. SatShield consistently detects the evolvingattack trafﬁc swiftly, enabling rapid recovery of benign trafﬁc
throughput after updating the top- kﬁlter. Although ACC-
Turbo demonstrates a similar reaction time to SatShield, itslower estimation accuracy due to online clustering algorithms
leads to decreased throughput of benign trafﬁc compared
to SatShield. Conversely, FIFO exhibits continuous degrada-tion in throughput during the attack. These results highlight
SatShield‘s effectiveness in mitigating dynamic LFA attacks
within the satellite networks.
Various Attack Scenarios: Fig. 12depicts the effectiveness
of SatShield in ﬁltering attack trafﬁc under various benign
trafﬁc loads (3, 5, 10, 15, and 19.5 Gb/s) using CAIDA19
as background trafﬁc and in a scenario with 10
4bots. It
was observed that the attack trafﬁc could pass through thelink almost unimpeded until reaching the link capacity limit.
However, once the total trafﬁc approached the link’s capacity,
the attack trafﬁc was suppressed, and SatShield ensured thebandwidth for benign trafﬁc. Furthermore, it was noted that
as the attack bandwidth per bot increased, the bandwidth
Fig. 12. Attack trafﬁc with different benign trafﬁc.
Fig. 13. Bandwidth occupation of benign trafﬁc in ISLs.
of attack trafﬁc successfully passing through the SatShield
exhibited more signiﬁcant ﬂuctuations, believed to be caused
by the top-k ﬁlter updates. More pronounced ﬂuctuations were
observed in scenarios with 103and 102bots, which are not
shown here due to space limitations.
Moreover, to validate SatShield‘s effectiveness on benign
trafﬁc protection at the satellite network level, Fig. 13shows
the bandwidth occupation of benign trafﬁc in 80 attackable
ISLs within the Starlink Shell 1 topology (refer to Section III)
with the Pop trafﬁc model, both before and after beingattacked. It can be seen that the benign trafﬁc was almost
unaffected by the attack trafﬁc when SatShield was deployed.
VII. F
URTHER DISCUSSION
SatShield achieves a line-rate, cost-effective solution for
LFA attack mitigation within the existing satellite network
conditions. However, scalability and deployment issues still
need to be discussed.
Can SatShield work with larger bot scales? While SatShield
has been designed to address LFA attacks involving a limited
number of bots, it has the capability to mitigate larger-scaleLFA attacks, assuming there is a noticeable distinction in the
ﬂow rates between the benign and attack trafﬁc. An example
arises with the deployment of 5G Nonterrestrial Networks
[70], ushering in a signiﬁcant inﬂux of the IoT devices
into the satellite networks. This expansion offers adversariesincreased bot resources. However, IoT device trafﬁc rates
are considerably lower than the typical Internet trafﬁc. Given
the goal of congesting ISL at several Gb/s capacities, attackﬂows are anticipated to exceed the rates of regular IoT trafﬁc
inevitably.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Electronic Science and Tech of China. Downloaded on January 13,2026 at 06:00:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 14 =====
JIANG et al.: SatShield: IN-NETWORK MITIGATION OF LINK FLOODING ATTACKS 27353
What is the impact of leaving SatShield always on?
When the link is congested, packets experience unpredictabledelays and losses. In such congested situations, the delays
and packet reordering introduced by SatShield for regular
trafﬁc can be considered negligible. During noncongestedperiods, the dynamic rerouting of ﬂows inherent to satellite
networks can also lead to packet reordering. Comparatively,
the packet reordering induced by SatShield‘s adjustments toﬂow priorities is insigniﬁcant. Therefore, we believe that
having SatShield always on will not signiﬁcantly impact the
performance of benign trafﬁc in satellite networks.
Which future research directions do we envision? We expect
future work to tackle two main research directions. First,
integrating additional signatures, such as new fan-in and
fan-out patterns, offers a promising solution to overcome
the limitations of ﬂow rate-based detection as bot scalesincrease. Second, optimizing the deployment of SatShield-
for example, dynamically adjusting its activation or dormancy
based on global trafﬁc patterns can signiﬁcantly reduce powerconsumption in satellite switches.
VIII. C
ONCLUSION
This article highlights the need for implementing the in-
network LFA defenses in the LEO constellation network,demonstrating the potential of integrating heavy ﬂow ﬁlters
and programmable ﬂow scheduling to achieve this objective.
We introduce SatShield, which to our best knowledge, is the
ﬁrst in-network ﬂow ﬁltering mechanism designed to mitigate
LFA attacks in the LEO constellation network. SatShield
effectively leverages two key insights.
1) Heavy ﬂow identiﬁcation—despite the inherent com-
plexity of LFA attacks in the satellite networks, the
actual attack trafﬁc tends to aggregate, facilitating theidentiﬁcation of attack trafﬁc.
2) Programmable scheduling—enabling the prioritization
of ﬂows in the queue based on their maliciousness,
thereby minimizing the impact on benign trafﬁc.
We implemented SatShield using the P4 programming lan-guage and deployed it on a programmable switch. Through our
evaluation, we demonstrate that SatShield effectively mitigates
LFA attacks at line rate.
A
CKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors thank the anonymous reviewers and Jintao Yang
for their valuable comments.
REFERENCES
[1] I. del Portillo, B. G. Cameron, and E. F. Crawley, “A technical
comparison of three low earth orbit satellite constellation systems to
provide global broadband,” Acta Astronautica , vol. 159, pp. 123–135,
Jun. 2019. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0094576518320368
[2] “SpaceX opens Starlink satellite Internet to public beta testers: Report,”
Nov. 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.space.com/spacex-invites-
starlink-internet-beta-testing
[3] “SpaceX, USAID deliver 5,000 satellite Internet terminals to Ukraine.”
Apr. 2022. [Online]. Available: https://www.reuters.com/technology/
spacex-usaid-deliver-5000-satellite-internet-terminals-ukraine/[4] “Elon musk says SpaceX will support starlink in gaza for interna-
tional aid groups.” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://www.wsj.com/livecoverage/israel-hamas-gaza-war-news/card/gaza-internet-access-sev
[5] R. T. Ioannides, T. Pany, and G. Gibbons, “Known vulnerabilities
of global navigation satellite systems, status, and potential miti-
gation techniques,” Proc. IEEE , vol. 104, no. 6, pp. 1174–1194,
Jun. 2016. [Online]. Available: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/7442783
[6] Q.-Y . Fu, Y .-H. Feng, H.-M. Wang, and P. Liu, “Initial satellite
access authentication based on doppler frequency shift,” IEEE Wireless
Commun. Lett. , vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 498–502, Mar. 2021. [Online].
Available: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/9248024
[7] P. Yue et al., “Low earth orbit satellite security and reliability: Issues,
solutions, and the road ahead,” Jul. 2023, arXiv:2201.03063 . [Online].
Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2201.03063
[ 8 ] L .X u e ,X .M a ,X .L u o ,E .W .W .C h a n ,T .T .N .M i u ,a n dG .G u ,
“LinkScope: Toward detecting target link ﬂooding attacks,” IEEE Trans.
Inf. Forensics Security , vol. 13, pp. 2423–2438, 2018.
[9] J. Wang, R. Wen, J. Li, F. Yan, B. Zhao, and F. Yu, “Detecting
and mitigating target link-ﬂooding attacks using SDN,” IEEE Trans.
Dependable Secure Comput. , vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 944–956, Nov. 2019.
[10] M. Zhang et al., “Poseidon: Mitigating volumetric DDoS attacks with
programmable switches,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Security Symp. ,
San Diego, CA, USA, 2020, pp. 1–18. [Online]. Available: https://www.
ndss-symposium.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/02/24007.pdf
[11] R. U. Rasool, H. Wang, U. Ashraf, K. Ahmed, Z. Anwar, and
W. Raﬁque, “A survey of link ﬂooding attacks in software deﬁnednetwork ecosystems,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl. , vol. 172, Dec. 2020,
Art. no. 102803. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S1084804520302757
[12] D. Bhattacherjee and A. Singla, “Network topology design at
27,000 km/hour,” in Proc. 15th Int. Conf. Emerg. Netw. Exp. And
Technol. , Dec. 2019, pp. 341–354. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/
10.1145/3359989.3365407
[13] J. Zheng, Q. Li, G. Gu, J. Cao, D. K. Y . Yau, and J. Wu, “Realtime DDoS
defense using COTS SDN switches via adaptive correlation analysis,”IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security , vol. 13, pp. 1838–1853, 2018.
[14] J. Xing, W. Wu, and A. Chen, “Ripple: A programmable, decentralized
link-ﬂooding defense against adaptive adversaries,” in Proc. USENIX
Security , 2021, pp. 3865–3881.
[15] H. Zhou, S. Hong, Y . Liu, X. Luo, W. Li, and G. Gu, “Mew:
Enabling large-scale and dynamic link-ﬂooding defenses on pro-
grammable switches,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Security Privacy , Dec. 2022,
pp. 3178–3192. [Online]. Available: https://www.computer.org/csdl/proceedings-article/sp/2023/933600b625/1Js0EbpFziM
[16] Z. Tang, B. Zhao, W. Yu, Z. Feng, and C. Wu, “Software deﬁned satellite
networks: Beneﬁts and challenges,” in Proc. IEEE Comput., Commun.
IT Appl. Conf. , Oct. 2014, pp. 127–132.
[17] B. J. Barritt and W. Eddy, “SDN enhancements for LEO satellite
networks,” in Proc. 34th AIAA Int. Commun. Satell. Syst. Conf. , 2016,
p. 5755.
[18] A. Papa, T. de Cola, P. Vizarreta, M. He, C. Mas-Machuca, and
W. Kellerer, “Design and evaluation of reconﬁgurable SDN LEO
constellations,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag. , vol. 17, no. 3,
pp. 1432–1445, Sep. 2020.
[19] C. Sacchi, F. Granelli, R. Bassoli, F. H. P. Fitzek, and M. Ruggieri, A
Roadmap to Future Space Connectivity: Satellite and Interplanetary
Networks (Signals and Communication Technology). Cham,
Switzerland: Springer Int., 2023, doi: 10.1007/978-3-031-30762-1 .
[20] Z. Zhao, X. Shi, Z. Wang, Q. Li, H. Zhang, and X. Yin, “Efﬁcient and
accurate ﬂow record collection with HashFlow,” IEEE Trans. Parallel
Distrib. Syst. , vol. 33, no. 5, pp. 1069–1083, May 2022. [Online].
Available: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/9495221
[21] F. Wang, W. Cui, and J. Tian, “A superresolution multipath estimation
algorithm for DSSS systems,” IEEE Trans. Aerosp. Electron. Syst. ,
vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 109–124, Feb. 2023.
[22] J. Pavur, D. Moser, V . Lenders, and I. Martinovic, “Secrets in the sky:
On privacy and infrastructure security in DVB-S satellite broadband,”inProc. 12th Conf. Security Privacy Wireless Mobile Netw. , 2019,
pp. 277–284.
[23] H. Pirayesh and H. Zeng, “Jamming attacks and anti-jamming strategies
in wireless networks: A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys
Tuts. , vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 767–809, 2nd Quart., 2022.
[24] D. He, S. Chan, and M. Guizani, “Communication security of unmanned
aerial vehicles,” IEEE Wireless Commun. , vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 134–139,
Aug. 2017.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Electronic Science and Tech of China. Downloaded on January 13,2026 at 06:00:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 15 =====
27354 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 11, NO. 16, 15 AUGUST 2024
[25] H. Guo, J. Li, J. Liu, N. Tian, and N. Kato, “A survey on space-air-
ground-sea integrated network security in 6G,” IEEE Commun. Surveys
Tuts. , vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 53–87, 1st Quart., 2021.
[26] S. A. Chaudhry et al., “A lightweight authentication scheme for 6G-IoT
enabled maritime transport system,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. ,
vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 2401–2410, Feb. 2023.
[27] K. Mayyas, “Performance analysis of the deﬁcient length LMS adaptive
algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process. , vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 2727–2734,
Aug. 2005.
[28] R. Merched and A. H. Sayed, “An embedding approach to frequency-
domain and subband adaptive ﬁltering,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process. ,
vol. 48, no. 9, pp. 2607–2619, Sep. 2000.
[29] J. Bao, B. Zhao, W. Yu, Z. Feng, C. Wu, and Z. Gong, “OpenSAN:
A software-deﬁned satellite network architecture,” ACM SIGCOMM
Comput. Commun. Rev. , vol. 44, no. 4, pp. 347–348, Aug. 2014.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/2740070.2631454
[30] A. U. Chaudhry and H. Yanikomeroglu, “Laser inter-satellite links in a
Starlink constellation,” Feb. 2021, arXiv:2103.00056 .
[31] G. Giuliari, T. Ciussani, A. Perrig, and A. Singla, “ICARUS: Attacking
low earth orbit satellite networks,” in Proc. USENIX Annu. Tech.
Conf. , 2021, pp. 317–331. [Online]. Available: https://www.usenix.org/
conference/atc21/presentation/giuliari
[32] “CelesTrak: Current GP element sets,” May 2024. [Online]. Available:
https://celestrak.org/NORAD/elements/
[33] “Satellite database |union of concerned scientists,” May 2023. [Online].
Available: https://www.ucsusa.org/resources/satellite-database
[34] “WMO OSCAR—List of all satellites,” 2024. [Online]. Available:
https://space.oscar.wmo.int/satellites
[35] M. Handley, “Delay is not an option: Low latency routing in space,” in
Proc. 17th ACM Workshop Hot Topics Netw. , 2018, pp. 85–91.
[36] A. Studer and A. Perrig, “The coremelt attack,” in Proc. Eur. Symp. Res.
Comput. Security , 2009, pp. 37–52.
[37] M. S. Kang, S. B. Lee, and V . D. Gligor, “The crossﬁre attack,” in Proc.
IEEE Symp. Security Privacy , 2013, pp. 127–141.
[38] G. Shang, P. Zhe, X. Bin, H. Aiqun, and R. Kui, “FloodDefender:
Protecting data and control plane resources under SDN-aimed DoSattacks,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM Conf. Comput. Commun. , 2017,
pp. 1–9.
[39] M. Ambrosin, M. Conti, F. De Gaspari, and R. Poovendran,
“LineSwitch: Tackling control plane saturation attacks in software-deﬁned networking,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw. , vol. 25, no. 2,
pp. 1206–1219, Apr. 2017.
[40] C. Röpke and T. Holz, “Sdn rootkits: Subverting network operating
systems of software-deﬁned networks,” in Proc. 18th Int. Symp. Res.
Attacks, Intrusions, Defenses , 2015, pp. 339–356.
[41] D. Tang, Y . Yan, C. Gao, W. Liang, and W. Jin, “LtRFT: Mitigate
the low-rate data plane DDoS attack with learning-to-rank enabled ﬂowtables,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security , vol. 18, pp. 3143–3157,
2023.
[42] A. Rezapour and W.-G. Tzeng, “RL-shield: Mitigating target link-
ﬂooding attacks using SDN and deep reinforcement learning routing
algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput. , vol. 19, no. 6,
pp. 4052–4067, Nov. 2022.
[43] L. Wang, Q. Li, Y . Jiang, X. Jia, and J. Wu, “Woodpecker: Detecting
and mitigating link-ﬂooding attacks via SDN,” Comput. Netw. , vol. 147,
pp. 1–13, Dec. 2018. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S1389128618309721
[44] R. U. Rasool, U. Ashraf, K. Ahmed, H. Wang, W. Raﬁque, and
Z. Anwar, “Cyberpulse: A machine learning based link ﬂooding attack
mitigation system for software deﬁned networks,” IEEE Access ,v o l .7 ,
pp. 34885–34899, 2019.
[45] K.-Y . Chen et al., “SDNShield: NFV-based defense framework against
DDoS attacks on SDN control plane,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw. , vol. 30,
no. 1, pp. 1–17, Feb. 2022. [Online]. Available: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/9524458
[46] Z. Liu et al., “Jaqen: A high-performance switch-native approach
for detecting and mitigating volumetric DDoS attacks with pro-grammable switches,” in Proc. 30th USENIX Security Symp. , 2021,
pp. 3829–3846. [Online]. Available: https://www.usenix.org/conference/
usenixsecurity21/presentation/liu-zaoxing[47] A. G. Alcoz, M. Strohmeier, V . Lenders, and L. Vanbever, “Aggregate-
based congestion control for pulse-wave DDoS defense,” in Proc. ACM
SIGCOMM Conf. , Aug. 2022, pp. 693–706. [Online]. Available: https://
doi.org/10.1145/3544216.3544263
[48] “Starlink: Application for ﬁxed satellite service by space exploration
holdings, LLC,” Federal Commun. Comm., Washington, DC, USA, Rep.
SAT-LOA-20161115-00118, Mar. 2018. [Online]. Available: https://fcc.
report/IBFS/SAT-LOA-20161115-00118
[49] S. Bauer, B. Jaeger, F. Helfert, P. Barias, and G. Carle, “On the
evolution of Internet ﬂow characteristics,” in Proc. Appl. Netw. Res.
Workshop , Jul. 2021, pp. 29–35. [Online]. Available: https://dl.acm.org/
doi/10.1145/3472305.3472321
[50] L. Tang, Y . Xiao, Q. Huang, and P. P. C. Lee, “A high-performance
invertible sketch for network-wide superspreader detection,” IEEE/ACM
Trans. Netw. , vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 724–737, Apr. 2023.
[51] “CAIDA resource catalog,” 2004. [Online]. Available: https://catalog.
caida.org/search?query=internet
[52] F. Michel, M. Trevisan, D. Giordano, and O. Bonaventure, “A ﬁrst look
at starlink performance,” in Proc. 22nd ACM Internet Meas. Conf. , 2022,
pp. 130–136.
[53] “The bandwidth of the StarLink constellation ···and the assessment of
its potential subscriber base in the USA.” Nov. 2021. [Online]. Available:http://www.satmagazine.com/story.php?number=1026762698
[54] N. Pachler, I. del Portillo, E. F. Crawley, and B. G. Cameron, “An
updated comparison of four low earth orbit satellite constellation systemsto provide global broadband,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun.
Workshops (ICC Workshops) , 2021, pp. 1–7. [Online]. Available: https://
ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/9473799/
[55] “World Urbanization prospects—Population division—United Nations,”
2018. [Online]. Available: https://population.un.org/wup/download/
[56] H. Namkung et al., “SketchLib: Enabling efﬁcient sketch-based moni-
toring on programmable switches,” in Proc. 19th USENIX Symp. Netw.
Syst. Design Implement. (NSDI) , 2022, pp. 743–759.
[57] S. Sheng, Q. Huang, S. Wang, and Y . Bao, “PR-sketch: Monitoring
per-key aggregation of streaming data with nearly full accuracy,” Proc.
VLDB Endow. , vol. 14, no. 10, pp. 1783–1796, Jun. 2021. [Online].
Available: https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.14778/3467861.3467868
[58] C. H. Song, P. G. Kannan, B. K. H. Low, and M. C. Chan, “FCM-Sketch:
Generic network measurements with data plane support,” in Proc. 16th
Int. Conf. Emerg. Netw. Exp. Technol. , Nov. 2020, pp. 78–92. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3386367.3432729
[59] G. Cormode and S. Muthukrishnan, “An improved data stream
summary: The count-min sketch and its applications,” J.
Algorithms , vol. 55, no. 1, pp. 58–75, 2005. [Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0196677403001913
[60] V . Sivaraman, S. Narayana, O. Rottenstreich, S. Muthukrishnan, and
J. Rexford, “Heavy-hitter detection entirely in the data plane,” in Proc.
SOSR , 2017, pp. 164–176.
[61] Y . Guo, F. Liu, A. Wang, and H. Liu, “AccuPIPE: Accurate heavy
ﬂow detection in the data plane using programmable switches,” in Proc.
IEEE/IFIP Netw. Oper. Manage. Symp. , Apr. 2020, pp. 1–5. [Online].
Available: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/9110463
[62] L. Tang, Q. Huang, and P. P. C. Lee, “MV-sketch: A fast and
compact invertible sketch for heavy ﬂow detection in network data
streams,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM Conf. Comput. Commun. , Apr. 2019,
pp. 2026–2034.
[63] R. S. Boyer and J. S. Moore, “MJRTY—A fast majority vote algorithm,”
inAutomated Reasoning (Automated Reasoning Series), vol. 1, W. Pase
and R. S. Boyer, Eds. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Springer, 1991,pp. 105–117, doi: 10.1007/978-94-011-3488-0_5 .
[64] M. Budiu and C. Dodd, “The p416 programming language,” ACM
SIGOPS Oper. Syst. Rev. , vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 5–14, 2017.
[65] “Edgecore networks.” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://www.edge-
core.com/productsInfo.php?cls=1&cls2=180&cls3=181&id=334
[66] “Open-Toﬁno/PUBLIC_Toﬁno-native-arch.pdf.” 2024. [Online].
Available: https://github.com/barefootnetworks/Open-Toﬁno/blob/master/PUBLIC_Toﬁno-Native-Arch.pdf
[67] K. Kaur, J. Singh, and N. S. Ghumman, “Mininet as software deﬁned
networking testing platform,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Commun., Comput.
Syst. (ICCCS) , 2014, pp. 139–142.
[68] “p4-spec/p4-16/psa/examples/psa-example-hello-world.p4 at main ·
p4lang/p4-spec,” Jul. 2021. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/p4lang/p4-spec/blob/main/p4-16/psa/examples/psa-example-hello-
world.p4
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Electronic Science and Tech of China. Downloaded on January 13,2026 at 06:00:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 16 =====
JIANG et al.: SatShield: IN-NETWORK MITIGATION OF LINK FLOODING ATTACKS 27355
[69] R. B. Basat, X. Chen, G. Einziger, and O. Rottenstreich, “Efﬁcient
measurement on programmable switches using probabilistic recircula-tion,” in Proc. IEEE 26th Int. Conf. Netw. Protocols (ICNP) , Sep. 2018,
pp. 313–323.
[70] “5G non-terrestrial networks,” Jul. 19, 2023. [Online]. Available:
https://www.3gpp.org/news-events/partner-news/5ga-paper-ntn
Wei Jiang received the B.Eng. degree from the
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering,Hubei University of Technology, Wuhan, China, in
2014, and the M.Eng. degree from the Electronic
Information School, Wuhan University, Wuhan, in2017, where he is currently pursuing the Ph.D.degree.
His current research interests include software-
deﬁned networking and LEO networks.
Hao Jiang (Member, IEEE) received the B.Eng.
degree in communication engineering, and theM.Eng. and Ph.D. degrees in communicationand information systems from Wuhan University,
Wuhan, China, in 1999, 2001, and 2004,
respectively.
He was a Postdoctoral Research Fellow with
LIMOS, Clermont-Ferrand, France, from 2004
to 2005, and was a Visiting Professor with the
University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada, andISIMA, Blaise Pascal University, Clermont-Ferrand.
He is currently a Professor with Wuhan University. He has authored over 60
papers in different journals and conferences. His research interest includes
mobile ad hoc network and mobile big data.
Yulai Xie (Member, IEEE) received the B.E. and
Ph.D. degrees in computer science from HuazhongUniversity of Science and Technology (HUST),Wuhan, China, in 2007 and 2013, respectively.
He was a Visiting Scholar with the University of
California at Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, SA, USA, in2010, and the Chinese University of Hong Kong,Hong Kong, in 2015. He is currently a Professor
with the School of Cyber Science and Engineering,
HUST. His research interests mainly include cloudstorage and virtualization, digital provenance, intru-
sion detection, machine learning, and computer architecture.
Jing Wu (Member, IEEE) received the B.Eng.
degree in communication engineering and the Ph.D.
degree in communication and information systems
from Wuhan University, Wuhan, China, in 2002 and2007, respectively.
From 2004 to 2005, she was a Postdoctoral
Research Fellow with LIMOS, Clermont-Ferrand,
France. She is currently an Associate Professor withWuhan University. Her research interests includewireless communication networks, network simula-
tion, and intelligence data processing.
Xiaofan He (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
B.S. degree in electronics and information engi-neering from Huazhong University of Science andTechnology, Wuhan, China, in 2008, the M.S.
degree in electrical and computer engineering from
McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada, in2011, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical andcomputer engineering from North Carolina State
University, Raleigh, NC, USA, in 2015.
He was a Tenure-Track Assistant Professor
of Electrical Engineering with Lamar University,
Beaumont, TX, USA, from 2016 to 2018. He moved back to his hometown
Wuhan in 2019 and is currently a Faculty Member with the School ofElectronic Information, Wuhan University, Wuhan. His research interests arein the general areas of wireless communications, networking, and computing.
His current research mainly focuses on (distributed) edge computing and the
associated optimization, scheduling, learning, and statistical analysis.
Dr. He received the Exemplary Reviewer Award of IEEE T
RANSACTIONS
ONCOMMUNICATIONS in 2014 and 2015, and a Distinguished Member of
the Technical Program Committee Award of IEEE INFOCOM in 2018. He is
currently serving as an Associate Editor for IEEE A CCESS .
Hao Li received the B.Eng. degree in electronic
information engineering from Wuhan University of
Science and Technology, Wuhan, China, in 2021.He is currently pursuing the master’s degree withWuhan University, Wuhan.
During this time, he won three university-level
scholarships. He will continue his doctoral studies onsoftware designed networks. His research interests
include network simulation and technology of future
networks.
Pan Zhou (Senior Member, IEEE) received the B.S.
degree (Advanced Class) from Huazhong Universityof Science and Technology (HUST), Wuhan, China,in 2006, the M.S. degree from the Department
of Electronics and Information Engineering, HUST,
in 2008, and the Ph.D. degree from the Schoolof Electrical and Computer Engineering, GeorgiaInstitute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA, in 2011.
He is currently a Full Professor and a Ph.D.
Advisor with Hubei Engineering Research Centeron Big Data Security, School of Cyber Science and
Engineering, HUST. He was a Senior Technical Member with Oracle Inc.,
Austin, TX, USA, from 2011 to 2013, and worked on Hadoop and distributedstorage system for big data analytics with Oracle Cloud Platform. His currentresearch interests include security and privacy, big data analytics, machine
learning, and information networks.
Prof. Zhou received the “Rising Star in Science and Technology of HUST”
in 2017. He held honorary degree in his bachelor and Merit Research Awardof HUST in his master study. He is currently an Associate Editor of IEEE
T
RANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING .
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Electronic Science and Tech of China. Downloaded on January 13,2026 at 06:00:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 